
--- Page 1 ---
Textbook of
Diabetes
EDITED BY
RICHARD I.G. HOLT
MA, MB BChir, PhD, FRCP, FHEA
Professor in Diabetes & Endocrinology
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease Division
University of Southampton School of Medicine
Southampton, UK
CLIVE S. COCKRAM
MB BS, BSc, MD (Lond), FRCP, FRACP, FHKAM (Med)
Emeritus Professor of Medicine
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR
People’s Republic of China
ALLAN FLYVBJERG
MD, DMSc
Professor of Clinical Endocrinology and
Chair, Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine
The Medical Research Laboratories
Aarhus University Hospital – Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
BARRY J. GOLDSTEIN
MD, PhD, FACP, FACE
Therapeutic Area Head, Diabetes and Obesity
Vice President, Clinical Research, Metabolism
Merck Research Laboratories
Rahway, NJ, USA
FOURTH EDITION
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
--- Page 2 ---

--- Page 3 ---
Textbook of Diabetes
COMPANION WEBSITE
Purchasing this book entitles you to access to the companion website:
textbookofdiabetes.com
The website includes:
(cid:129) Interactive Multiple-Choice Questions for each chapter
(cid:129) Reference lists with external links
(cid:129) Figures from the book for downloading
(cid:129) All chapters online
How to access the site:
(cid:129) Scratch off the label below to see your unique PIN number
(cid:129) Go to the website textbookofdiabetes.com and follow the registration instructions
SCRATCH CODE HERE
Please note that the book cannot be returned once the label is scratched off, and the unique (personal)
PIN cannot be shared. The site is for individual use by purchasers only and cannot be networked.
--- Page 4 ---
W e dedicate this book to all people living with diabetes and the healthcare
professionals who look after them. We would also like to dedicate this book to our
families without whose support and encouragement the book would never have
been fi nished.
--- Page 5 ---
Textbook of
Diabetes
EDITED BY
RICHARD I.G. HOLT
MA, MB BChir, PhD, FRCP, FHEA
Professor in Diabetes & Endocrinology
Developmental Origins of Health and Disease Division
University of Southampton School of Medicine
Southampton, UK
CLIVE S. COCKRAM
MB BS, BSc, MD (Lond), FRCP, FRACP, FHKAM (Med)
Emeritus Professor of Medicine
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong SAR
People’s Republic of China
ALLAN FLYVBJERG
MD, DMSc
Professor of Clinical Endocrinology and
Chair, Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine
The Medical Research Laboratories
Aarhus University Hospital – Aarhus University
Aarhus, Denmark
BARRY J. GOLDSTEIN
MD, PhD, FACP, FACE
Therapeutic Area Head, Diabetes and Obesity
Vice President, Clinical Research, Metabolism
Merck Research Laboratories
Rahway, NJ, USA
FOURTH EDITION
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
--- Page 6 ---
This edition fi rst published 2010. © 1991, 1997, 2003, 2010 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell’s publishing program
has been merged with Wiley’s global Scientifi c, Technical and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered offi ce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ,
UK
Editorial offi ces: 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030-5774, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offi ces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/
wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identifi ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as
permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not
be available in electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned
in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the
subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent
professional should be sought.
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientifi c research, understanding, and discussion
only and are not intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specifi c method,
diagnosis, or treatment by physicians for any particular patient. The publisher and the author make no
representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and
specifi cally disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied warranties of fi tness for a
particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifi cations, changes in governmental
regulations, and the constant fl ow of information relating to the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the
reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each
medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of
usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers should consult with a specialist where appropriate.
The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of
further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the information the organization
or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet
Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when
it is read. No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the
publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
ISBN: 9781405191814
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Textbook of diabetes. – 4th ed. / edited by Richard I.G. Holt ... [et al.].
p. ; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4051-9181-4 (hardback : alk. paper)
1. Diabetes. I. Holt, Richard I.G.
[DNLM: 1. Diabetes Mellitus. WK 810 T355 2010]
RC660.T467 2010
616.4'62–dc22
2010013907
Set in 9.25/12 pt Minion by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
Printed in Singapore
1 2010
--- Page 7 ---
Contents
List of Contributors, ix Part 3 Pathogenesis of Diabetes
Preface to the Fourth Edition, xiii
9 Type 1 Diabetes, 141
Foreword, xv Autoimmune Type 1 Diabetes, 141
Ahmed J. Delli, Helena Elding Larsson, Sten-A. Ivarsson
List of Abbreviations, xvi
& Åke Lernmark
Other Disorders with Type 1 Phenotype, 152
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Alice P.S. Kong & Juliana C.N. Chan
Social Context
10 Abnormalities of Insulin Secretion and β-Cell Defects in
Type 2 Diabetes, 160
1 The History of Diabetes Mellitus, 3
Mazen Alsahli & John E. Gerich
Robert B. Tattersall
11 Insulin Resistance in Type 2 Diabetes, 174
2 The Classifi cation and Diagnosis of Diabetes, 24
Hannele Yki-Järvinen
K. George M.M. Alberti
12 The Genetics of Type 2 Diabetes: From Candidate Gene
3 Epidemiology of Type 1 Diabetes, 31
Biology to Genome-Wide Studies, 191
Lars C. Stene, Valma Harjutsalo, Elena Moltchanova
Martine Vaxillaire & Philippe Froguel
& Jaakko Tuomilehto
13 Metabolic Disturbances in Diabetes, 215
4 Epidemiology of Type 2 Diabetes, 45
Adrian Vella & Robert A. Rizza
Ronald C.W. Ma & Peter C.Y. Tong
14 Obesity and Diabetes, 227
5 The Global Burden of Diabetes, 69
Hans Hauner
Mohammed K. Ali, Mary Beth Weber & K.M. Venkat
Narayan
Part 4 Other Types of Diabetes
Part 2 Normal Physiology
15 Monogenic Causes of Diabetes, 245
Angus Jones & Andrew T. Hattersley
6 Islet Function and Insulin Secretion, 87
Peter M. Jones & Shanta J. Persaud 16 Drug-Induced Diabetes, 265
Neil J.L. Gittoes, John Ayuk & Robin E. Ferner
7 Insulin Action, 104
Xuxia Wu & W. Timothy Garvey 17 Endocrine Disorders that Cause Diabetes, 279
Neil A. Hanley
8 Control of Weight: How Do We Get Fat? 126
George A. Bray 18 Pancreatic Diseases and Diabetes, 298
Ranjit Unnikrishnan & Viswanathan Mohan
v
--- Page 8 ---
Contents
Part 5 Managing the Patient with Part 7 Microvascular Complications
Diabetes in Diabetes
19 Clinical Presentations of Diabetes, 313 35 Pathogenesis of Microvascular Complications, 555
Ee Lin Lim & Roy Taylor Ferdinando Giacco & Michael Brownlee
20 The Aims of Diabetes Care, 323 36 Diabetic Retinopathy, 575
Richard I.G. Holt & Barry J. Goldstein Peter H. Scanlon
21 Educating the Patient with Diabetes, 334 37 Diabetic Nephropathy, 599
Carolé Mensing & Barbara Eichorst Sally M. Marshall & Allan Flyvbjerg
22 Lifestyle Issues: Diet, 346 38 Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy, 615
Monika Toeller Dan Ziegler
23 Lifestyle Issues: Exercise, 358
Jane E. Yardley, Angela Alberga, Glen P. Kenny
& Ronald J. Sigal Part 8 Macrovascular Complications
in Diabetes
24 Social Aspects of Diabetes, 380
Brian M. Frier & Mark W.J. Strachan
39 The Pathogenesis of Macrovascular Complications
25 Monitoring Diabetes, 399 Including Atherosclerosis in Diabetes, 637
Andrew J. Farmer Riccardo Candido, Mark E. Cooper & Karin A.M.
Jandeleit-Dahm
26 Drug Therapy: Special Considerations
in Diabetes, 410 40 Cardiovascular Risk Factors, 657
Bernard M.Y. Cheung & Robin E. Ferner Hypertension, 657
Peter M. Nilsson
Dyslipidemia: Diabetes Lipid Therapies, 672
Part 6 Treatment of Diabetes
Adie Viljoen & Anthony S. Wierzbicki
27 Insulin and Insulin Treatment, 427 41 Congestive Heart Failure, 684
Stephen Gough & Parth Narendran Inga S. Thrainsdottir & Lars Rydén
28 New Technologies for Insulin Administration and Glucose 42 Cerebrovascular Disease, 698
Monitoring, 440 Colum F. Amory & Jesse Weinberger
Howard Wolpert & Judy Shih
43 Peripheral Vascular Disease, 710
29 Oral Antidiabetic Agents, 452 Henrik H. Sillesen
Clifford J. Bailey & Andrew J. Krentz
30 Non-Insulin Parenteral Therapies, 478
Part 9 Other Complications of Diabetes
Jens Juul Holst, Sten Madsbad & Ole Schmitz
31 How to Use Type 2 Diabetes Treatments in Clinical 44 Foot Problems in Patients with Diabetes, 727
Practice: Combination Therapies, 494 Andrew J.M. Boulton
Joseph A. Aloi & Anthony L. McCall
45 Sexual Function in Men and Woman with Diabetes, 743
32 In-Hospital Treatment and Surgery in Patients with David Price
Diabetes, 514
46 Gastrointestinal Manifestations of Diabetes, 760
Maggie Sinclair Hammersley & June James
Adil E. Bharucha & Michael Camilleri
33 Hypoglycemia in Diabetes, 528
47 The Skin in Diabetes, 774
Philip E. Cryer
Graham R. Sharpe & Paul D. Yesudian
34 Acute Metabolic Complications of Diabetes: Diabetic
48 Bone and Rheumatic Disorders in Diabetes, 789
Ketoacidosis and Hyperosmolar Hyperglycemia, 546
Andrew Grey & Nicola Dalbeth
Troels Krarup Hansen & Niels Møller
vi
--- Page 9 ---
Contents
49 Psychologic Factors and Diabetes, 807 Part 12 Future Directions
Christopher M. Ryan
59 Future Drug Treatment for Type 1 Diabetes, 1001
50 Diabetes and Infections, 835
Helena Elding Larsson, Ahmed J. Delli, Sten-A. Ivarsson
Clive S. Cockram & Nelson Lee
& Åke Lernmark
60 Future Drug Treatments for Type 2 Diabetes, 1017
Part 10 Diabetes in Special Groups Clifford J. Bailey
61 Other Future Directions, 1045
51 Diabetes in Childhood, 859
Stem Cell Therapy in Diabetes, 1045
Christine Chan & Marian Rewers
Shuibing Chen, Jayaraj Rajagopal, Qiao Zhou &
52 Diabetes in Adolescence and Transitional Care, 875 Douglas A. Melton
Debbie Kralik & Maria Kambourakis
Islet Transplantation, 1050
53 Diabetes in Pregnancy, 888 Angela Koh, Peter Senior & A.M. James Shapiro
Anne Dornhorst & Anita Banerjee
Gene Therapy, 1064
54 Diabetes in Old Age, 922 Andreea R. Barbu & Nils Welsh
Alan J. Sinclair
62 Future Models of Diabetes Care, 1070
55 Psychiatric Disorders and Diabetes, 940 Robert A. Gabbay & Alan M. Adelman
Robert C. Peveler & Richard I.G. Holt
Index, 1081
Part 11 Delivery and Organization
of Diabetes Care
56 The Role of Community and Specialist Services, 959
Jane Overland, Margaret McGill & Dennis K. Yue
57 The Role of the Multidisciplinary Team, 969
Wing-Yee So & Juliana C.N. Chan
58 Models of Diabetes Care Across Different
Resource Settings, 984
A companion website for this book is available at:
Naomi S. Levitt, Bob Mash, Nigel Unwin, Jean Claude
textbookofdiabetes.com
Mbanya, Jae-Hyoung Cho & Kun-Ho Yoon
vii
--- Page 10 ---

--- Page 11 ---
List of Contributors
Alan M. Adelman MS, MD Clifford J. Bailey PhD, FRCP(Edin), Michael Camilleri MD
Professor of Family and Community Medicine, Vice FRCPath Atherton and Winifred W. Bean Professor, Professor
Chair for Academic Affairs and Research, Penn State Professor in Clinical Science and Head of Diabetes of Medicine and Physiology, College of Medicine,
Milton S. Hershey Medical Center, Penn State Research, School of Life and Health Sciences, Aston Mayo Clinic and Clinical Enteric Neuroscience
College of Medicine, Hershey, PA, USA University, Birmingham, UK Translational and Epidemiological Research
Program, Division of Gastroenterology and
Angela Alberga MSc Anita Banerjee BSc, MBBS, MRCP Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
F aculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa and Obstetric Physician, Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Princess Royal University Hospital, London, Riccardo Candido MD, PhD
Ontario, Canada England UK Diabetic Centre, Trieste, Italy
K. George M.M. Alberti DPhil, FRCP Andreea R. Barbu PhD Christine M. Chan MD
Senior Research Fellow, Imperial College, London; Department of Medical Cell Biology and Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes,
Emeritus Professor of Medicine, University of Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University of Colorado Denver, School of Medicine,
Newcastle, Newcastle, UK University, Uppsala, Sweden Aurora, CO, USA
Mohammed K. Ali MBChB, MSc Adil E. Bharucha MD Juliana C.N. Chan MBChB MD FRCP
Assistant Professor, Hubert Department of Global Professor of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology Professor of Medicine and Therapeutics, Director,
Health, Rollins School of Public Health, Global and Hepatology, Clinical Enteric Neuroscience Hong Kong Institute of Diabetes and Obesity, The
Diabetes Research Center, Emory University, Translational and Epidemiological Research Chinese University of Hong Kong, The Prince of
Atlanta, GA, USA Program, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China
Joseph A. Aloi MD Andrew J.M. Boulton MD, DSc (Hon), Shuibing Chen PhD
Associate Professor of Internal Medicine, The
FRCP
Postdoctoral Fellow, Department of Stem Cell and
Strelitz Diabetes Center for Endocrine and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Professor of Medicine, University of Manchester
Metabolic Disorders, Eastern Virginia Medical Cambridge, MA, USA
and Manchester Royal Infi rmary, Manchester, UK;
School , Norfolk, VA, USA
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami,
Miami, FL, USA Bernard M.Y. Cheung MD, PhD
Mazen Alsahli MD Chair of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
Professor of Medicine, University of Rochester George A. Bray MD, MACP Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University of
School of Medicine, Rochester, NY, USA Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Boyd Professor, Pennington Biomedical Research
Center, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge,
Colum F. Amory MD, MPH LA, USA Jae - Hyoung Cho MD
Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, Assistant Professor, Department of Endocrinology,
USA Michael Brownlee MD Seoul St. Mary ’ s Hospital, College of Medicine, The
Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea
Anita and Jack Saltz Professor of Diabetes Research,
John Ayuk MD Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY,
Centre for Endocrinology, Diabetes and USA Mark E. Cooper MD, PhD
Metabolism, University of Birmingham and Queen Director, Danielle Alberti JDRF Centre for Diabetes
Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, UK Complications, Head, Vascular Division – Baker IDI
Heart Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia
ix
--- Page 12 ---
List of Contributors
Philip E. Cryer MD Ferdinando Giacco PhD Sten – A. Ivarsson MD, PhD
I rene E. and Michael M. Karl Professor of Postdoctoral Fellow, Diabetes Research and Training Clinical Research Center (CRC), Lund University
Endocrinology and Metabolism in Medicine, Center, Departments of Medicine and and Department of Clinical Sciences/Paediatric
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Endocrinology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Endocrinology, University Hospital MAS, Malm ö ,
Louis, MO, USA New York, NY, USA Sweden
Nicola Dalbeth MD, FRACP Neil J.L. Gittoes MD June James MSc, BA (Hons) Dip Nursing,
Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Senior Lecturer in Medicine, Centre for NP RGN
Auckland, New Zealand Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Consultant Nurse in Diabetes, University Hospitals
University of Birmingham and Queen Elizabeth of Leicester, Leicester, UK
Ahmed J. Delli MD, MPH Hospital Birmingham, Birmingham, UK
Clinical Research Center (CRC), Lund University, Karin A.M. Jandeleit- Dahm MD, PhD,
Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Celiac Steve Gough
FRACP
Disease, University Hospital MAS, Malmö , Sweden Professor of Diabetes, Oxford Centre for Diabetes
B aker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Co- h ead,
Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Diabetes Division; Professor of Medicine (Adjunct),
Anne Dornhorst BSc, DM, FRCP, FRCPath Oxford; Consultant Physician, Churchill Hospital, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia
Oxford, UK
C onsultant Physician, Honorary Senior Lecturer,
Department of Medicine, Imperial College Peter Jones PhD
Healthcare NHS Trust, Hammersmith Hospital, Andrew Grey MD
Professor of Endocrine Biology, King ’ s College
London, UK Department of Medicine, University of Auckland,
London, London, UK
Auckland, New Zealand
Barbara Eichorst MS,RD,CDE Angus Jones MBBS, MRCP
Healthy Interactions Global Conversation Map ™ Maggie Sinclair Hammersley MB,
Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical
Facilitator, Chicago, IL, USA FRCP School, Exeter, UK
Consultant Physician and Senior Lecturer, Nuffi eld
Andrew J. Farmer DM, FRCGP Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Maria Kambourakis BSc(Hons)
U niversity Lecturer, Department of Primary Health Oxford, UK
Research Offi cer/Type 1 Diabetes Program Offi cer,
Care, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Type 1 Diabetes Program, Diabetes Australia,
Neil A. Hanley MBChB, PhD Victoria, Australia
Robin E. Ferner MSc, MD, FRCP Professor of Medicine, Endocrinology and Diabetes
Professor, West Midlands Centre for Adverse Drug Group, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK Glen P. Kenny MD
Reactions, City Hospital, Birmingham, UK
Ottawa Hospital Research Institute and Laboratory
Troels Krarup Hansen MD, PhD of Human Bioenergetics and Environmental
Brian M. Frier BSc(Hons), MD, FRCPE, A ssociate Professor, Department of Endocrinology Physiology, School of Human Kinetics, Faculty of
FRCPG and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Health Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Professor, Department of Diabetes, Royal Infi rmary Aarhus, Denmark Ontario, Canada
of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Valma Harjutsalo PhD Angela Koh MBBS (Singapore), MRCP (UK)
Philippe Froguel MD, PhD Folkh ä lsan Institute of Genetics, Folkh ä lsan Assistant Professor, Department of Medicine
Institut de Biologie de Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Research Center, Biomedicum Helsinki; Diabetes (Endocrinology), Attending Physician, Clinical Islet
Lille, France; Section of Genomic Medicine, Prevention Unit, National Institute of Health and Transplant Program, University of Alberta,
Imperial College London, London, UK Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Division of Nephrology, Edmonton, Canada
Department of Medicine, Helsinki University
Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland
Robert A. Gabbay MD, PhD Alice P.S. Kong MBChB, MRCP (UK),
Director, Penn State Institute for Diabetes and FRCP (Glasg)
Andrew T. Hattersley MD
Obesity; Professor of Medicine and Molecular A ssociate Professor, Department of Medicine and
Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical
Medicine, Penn State College of Medicine; Director, Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong
School, Exeter, UK
Diabetes Program, Penn State Milton S. Hershey Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
Medical Center, Hershey, PA , USA
Hans Hauner MD Debbie Kralik PhD, RN
W. Timothy Garvey MD Director, Else Kr ö ner - Fresenius - Center for General Manager, Research and Strategy, Royal
Nutritional Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar,
Butterworth Professor and Chair, Department of District Nursing Service, South Australia; Associate
Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
Nutrition Sciences; Director, UAB Diabetes Professor, University of South Australia and
Research and Training Center, University of University of Adelaide, Glenside, Australia
Alabama at Birmingham; Birmingham Veterans Jens Juul Holst MD, DMSc
Affairs Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA Professor of Medical Physiology, Department of Andrew J. Krentz MD, FRCP
Biomedical Sciences, The Panum Institute,
Formerly Southampton University Hospitals NHS
John E. Gerich MD University of Copenhagen, Denmark Trust, Southampton, UK
Professor of Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine, Rochester, NY, USA
x
--- Page 13 ---
List of Contributors
Helena Elding Larsson MD, PhD Margaret McGill RN, MSc(med) Shanta J. Persaud PhD
Clinical Research Center (CRC), Lund University; Diabetes Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Professor of Diabetes and Endocrinology, King ’ s
Department of Clinical Sciences/Paediatric Camperdown, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia College London, London, UK
Endocrinology, University Hospital MAS, Malm ö ,
Sweden Douglas A. Melton Robert C. Peveler MA, DPhil, BM, BCh,
Thomas Dudley Cabot Professor in the Natural FRCPsych
Nelson Lee MD,FRCP(Edin) Sciences, Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Clinical Neurosciences Division, School of
Associate Professor, Head, Division of Infectious Biology; Harvard Stem Cell Institute; Investigator, Medicine, University of Southampton and Royal
Diseases, Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard South Hants Hospital, Southampton, UK
Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese University of University, Cambridge, MA, USA
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
David Price MD, FRCP
Carol é R. Mensing RN, MA, CDE Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Å ke Lernmark PhD Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA Morriston Hospital, Swansea, UK
Professor of Experimental Diabetes, Lund
University/CRC, Department of Clinical Sciences, Viswanathan Mohan MD, FRCP(UK), Jayaraj Rajagopal
University Hospital MAS, Malm ö , Sweden
FRCP(Glasg), PhD, DSc, FNASc C enter for Regenerative Medicine, Massachusetts
Chairman and Chief Diabetologist, Dr. Mohan ’ s General Hospital; Principal Investigator, Harvard
Naomi S. Levitt MBChB, MD, FCP(SA) Diabetes Specialities Centre, WHO Collaborating Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA, USA
Professor and Head of Division of Diabetic Centre for Non Communicable Diseases Prevention
Medicine and Endocrinology, Department of and Control, IDF Centre of Education; President Marian Rewers MD, PhD
Medicine, University of Cape Town and Groote and Chief of Diabetes Research, Madras Diabetes
Professor, Pediatrics and Preventive Medicine;
Schuur Hospital, Cape Town, South Africa Research Foundation, ICMR Advanced Centre for
Clinical Director, Barbara Davis Center for
Genomics of Diabetes, Gopalapuram, Chennai,
Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Denver,
Ee Lin Lim MRCP India School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA
Diabetes Research Group, Institute of Cellular
Medicine, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon Niels M ø ller MD, DMSc Robert A. Rizza MD
Tyne, UK Professor, Department of Endocrinology and
Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology,
Internal Medicine, The Medical Research
Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, Mayo Clinic,
Ronald C.W. Ma MB BChir, MRCP Laboratories, Arhus University Hospital, Arhus, Rochester, MN, USA
Associate Professor, Division of Endocrinology and Denmark
Diabetes, Department of Medicine and
Christopher M. Ryan PhD
Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Elena Moltchanova PhD
Professor of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh
Kong, Prince Of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, Diabetes Unit, Department of Health Promotion
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
China and Chronic Disease Prevention, National Institute
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland
Sten Madsbad MD, DMSc Lars Rydé n MD, FRCP, FESC, FACC, FAHA
Professor Emeritus, Cardiology Unit, Department of
Professor of Diabetology, Department of K. M. Venkat Narayan MD, MSc, MBA,
Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden
Endocrinology, Hvidovre Hospital, Hvidovre,
FRCP
Denmark
Ruth and O.C. Hubert Professor of Global Health,
Peter H. Scanlon MD, MRCOphth, DCH,
Professor of Epidemiology and Medicine, Rollins
Sally M. Marshall MD School of Public Health, Emory University, Atlanta, FRCP
P rofessor of Diabetes, Diabetes Research Group, GA, USA Consultant Ophthalmologist, Gloucestershire and
Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Oxford Eye Units; Lecturer, Harris Manchester
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Parth Narendran College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
Institute of Biomedical Research, The Medical
Bob Mash MBChB, MRCGP, PhD School, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, Ole Schmitz MD, DMSc
P rofessor, Division of Family Medicine and Primary UK Professor of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of
Care, Stellenbosch University, Tygerberg, South Clinical Pharmacology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Africa Peter M. Nilsson MD Denmark
Professor of Clinical Cardiovascular Research,
Jean - Claude Mbanya MD, PhD, FRCP Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Peter A. Senior BMedSci, MBBS, PhD,
P rofessor of Medicine and Endocrinology, Faculty University Hospital, Malmö , Sweden MRCP(UK)
of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Clinical Islet Transplant Program, University of
Yaounde I, Yaounde, Cameroon Jane Overland MPH, PhD Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Nurse Practitioner, Diabetes Centre, Royal Prince
Anthony L. McCall MD, PhD Alfred Hospital, Campderdown, New South Wales, A.M. James Shapiro MD PhD DSc (Hon)
James M. Moss Professor of Diabetes in Internal Australia; Clinical Associate Professor, The Faculty FRCS(Eng) FRCSC MSM
Medicine, Diabetes and Hormone Center of of Nursing and Midwifery, The University of P rofessor of Surgery, Director, Clinical Islet
Excellence, University of Virginia School of Sydney, Sydney, Australia Transplant Program, AHFMR Scholar, University of
Medicine, Charlottesville, VA, USA Alberta, Edmonton, Canada
xi
--- Page 14 ---
List of Contributors
Graham R. Sharpe MBChB, BA, PhD, FRCP Peter C.Y. Tong MBBS, PhD, BPharm, FRCP Anthony S. Wierzbicki DM, DPhil,
C onsultant Dermatologist, Department of Professor, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, FRCPath, FAHA
Dermatology, Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, UK Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Consultant Metabolic Physician and Chemical
Chinese University of Hong Kong and Prince Of Pathologist, Guy ’ s and St Thomas Hospitals,
Judy Shih MD, PhD Wales Hospital, Hong Kong SAR, China London, UK
Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA
Jaakko Tuomilehto MD, MA, PhD Howard Wolpert MD
Ronald J. Sigal MD, MPH, FRCPC Hjelt Institute, University of Helsinki and Diabetes Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA
Prevention Unit, Department of Health Promotion,
Professor of Medicine, Cardiac Sciences, and
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki,
Community Health Sciences, Faculties of Medicine Xuxia Wu MD, PhD
Finland, and South Ostrobothnia Central Hospital,
and Kinesiology, The University of Calgary, Canada Department of Nutrition Sciences, University of
Sein ä joki, Finland
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA
Henrik H. Sillesen MD, DMSc
Ranjit Unnikrishnan MD
Head, Department of Vascular Surgery, Jane E. Yardley MSc
Director and Consultant Diabetologist, Dr. Mohan ’ s
Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, F aculty of Health Sciences, University of Ottawa and
Diabetes Specialities Centre, WHO Collaborating
Copenhagen, Denmark Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Centre for Non Communicable Diseases Prevention
Ontario, Canada
and Control and IDF Centre of Education, Madras
Alan J. Sinclair MSc, MD, FRCP Diabetes Research Foundation, ICMR Advanced
Deputy Dean and Professor of Medicine, Centre for Genomics of Diabetes, Chennai, India Paul D. Yesudian MB, MD, MRCP
Bedfordshire and Hertfordshire Postgraduate C onsultant Dermatologist, Department of
Medical School; Geriatric and Diabetes Research Nigel Unwin BA, MSc, DM, FRCP, FFPH Dermatology, University of Liverpool and
Centre, University of Bedfordshire, Luton, UK Broadgreen Hospital, Liverpool, UK
Professor of Public Health and Epidemiology,
Faculty of Medicine, University of the West Indies,
Wing - Yee So MBChB, MD, FRCP Barbados Hannele Yki- J är vinen MD, FRCP
Associate Consultant, Prince of Wales Hospital, Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine,
Hong Kong SAR, China Martine Vaxillaire PharmD, PhD Division of Diabetes, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland
Research Director at Pasteur Institute, CNRS 8090
Lars C. Stene PhD and Pasteur Institute, Lille, France
Division of Epidemiology, Norwegian Institute of Kun - Ho Yoon MD, PhD
Public Health, Oslo, Norway; Oslo Diabetes Adrian Vella MD, FRCP(Edin) Professor, Department of Endocrinology and
Research Centre, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Metabolism, Seoul St. Mary ’ s Hospital, College of
A ssociate Professor of Medicine, Division of
Norway Medicine, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul,
Endocrinology, Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition,
Korea
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
Mark W. J. Strachan MD, FRCP (Edin)
C onsultant in Diabetes and Endocrinology, Adie Viljoen MBChB, MMed, FCPath (SA), Dennis K. Yue MBBS, FRACP, PhD
Metabolic Unit, Western General Hospital, Diabetes Centre, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital;
Edinburgh, UK FRCPath, MBA University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales,
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, Department of
Australia
Chemical Pathology, Lister Hospital, Stevenage, UK
Robert B. Tattersall MB, ChB, MD, FRCP
Emeritus Professor of Clinical Diabetes, University Qiao Zhou
of Nottingham, Nottinghamshire, UK Mary Beth Weber MPH Assistant Professor, Department of Stem Cell and
Nutrition and Health Sciences Program, Graduate
Regenerative Biology, Principle Investigator,
Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences,
Roy Taylor MD, FRCP Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Havard University,
Global Diabetes Research Center, Emory University,
P rofessor of Medicine and Metabolism, and Cambridge, MA, USA
Atlanta, GA, USA
Director, Newcastle Magnetic Resonance Centre,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Dan Ziegler MD, FRCPE
Jesse Weinberger MD
Professor of Internal Medicine, Institute for Clinical
Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of
Inga S. Thrainsdottir MD, PhD Diabetology, German Diabetes Center at the
Medicine, New York, NY, USA
Department of Cardiology, Landspitali University Heinrich Heine University, Leibniz Center for
Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland Diabetes Research; Department of Metabolic
Nils Welsh MD, PhD Diseases, University Hospital, D ü sseldorf, Germany
P rofessor in Molecular Infl ammation Research,
Monika Toeller MD
Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala
German Diabetes Center, Heinrich Heine University
University, Uppsala, Sweden
D ü sseldorf and Leibniz Center for Diabetes
Research, D ü sseldorf, Germany
xii
--- Page 15 ---
Preface to the Fourth Edition
T he management of diabetes is a major health challenge, and its Alongside the developments in the pathophysiology of
prevalence is increasing at an alarming rate, especially in the diabetes have come major advances in the treatment of diabetes.
developing world. According to the International Diabetes Some of these therapeutic innovations have been withdrawn,
Federation, diabetes currently affects more than 285 million such as inhaled insulin, but many have been adopted in
people worldwide, a fi gure that is expected to rise to 435 million clinical practice. The development of new oral agents to treat type
by 2030. During the writing of this book over the last 18 months, 2 diabetes has diversifi ed choices for clinicians and people
approximately 15 million people will have developed diabetes. with diabetes. Drugs affecting glucagon - like peptide 1 (GLP - 1)
Although treatments continue to improve, many people die as a and the incretin axis that were mentioned briefl y as future treat-
result of their diabetes. Between 6 – 16% of all deaths are attribut- ments in the last edition are now fi rmly established as effective
able to diabetes and around 900 will have died in the 2 hours treatments of type 2 diabetes. Many studies have highlighted
taken to write this preface. Diabetes accounts for about 6% of the advantages and disadvantages of the newer agents making the
total global mortality, on a par with that seen in HIV/AIDS. Many choice of treatment more complicated than ever. Beyond the
of these deaths will result from cardiovascular disease which gluco - centric view of diabetes, major cardiovascular trials con-
occurs at least twice as often in diabetes as in people without tinue to show the benefi ts of statin therapy in people with
diabetes. Diabetes continues to cause suffering through its com- diabetes.
plications. It is the commonest cause of kidney failure in devel- The publication of this new edition is timely given the rapid
oped countries where it is also the leading cause of blindness in advances in knowledge. This edition has a new editorial team
adults of working age. Diabetes is also a major cause of non - drawn from the UK, Europe, USA and Asia to refl ect the global
traumatic lower limb amputation. As well as the personal cost, nature of the diabetes epidemic. The new team has experienced
diabetes places a huge burden on health economies. In 2010, it is a big learning curve and we are profoundly grateful that we could
estimated that worldwide, at least US$ 376 billion will be used to stand on the shoulders of John Pickup and Gareth Williams, the
treat and prevent diabetes and its complications. Never have the editors of the previous three editions. The new book has retained
challenges in providing diabetes healthcare been larger. many of the excellent author team brought together by John and
During the eight years since the publication of the previous Gareth and the structure is similar to the previous editions.
edition of this textbook, there have been great strides in the man- Nevertheless like any new teams we have tried to improve the
agement and understanding of diabetes. International collabora- book while keeping the sound ideas from the previous book. The
tions using large and varied cohorts with increasingly sophisticated book has been shortened into one volume to make it easier to
technologies have allowed a greater appreciation of the genetic use. We have emphasized the clinical aspects of diabetes to a
factors that predispose to diabetes. Our molecular understanding greater extent than previous editions and refl ecting the diverse
of insulin resistance and the regulation of insulin secretion has locations of the editors, the chapter authors are also dispersed
increased as has our appreciation of the mechanisms underlying throughout the globe making this a truly international textbook
complications. which crosses continents and highlights both developed and
The diagnostic criteria look set to be changed again and may developing health systems.
incorporate hemoglobin A1c (HbA ) while the units of the latter As editors we are only too aware of the work that many people
1c
have also recently changed to refl ect the development of more have contributed to the book, without which our endeavors
reliable and traceable assays. As HbA remains the currency of would have been much harder, if not impossible. The chapter
1c
everyday diabetes practice, these changes will provide major edu- authors are at the top of our list for our gratitude. Their willing-
cational challenges for patients and professionals alike. ness to devote their time and effort into compiling scholarly and
xiii
--- Page 16 ---
Preface to the Fourth Edition
relevant chapters, while tolerating nagging e - mails from us, has Our thanks also go to Rob Blundell (Production Editor) and
been humbling. In an age where book writing often comes fourth Helen Harvey (Project Manager) in the production team.
behind grant and paper writing and clinical work, we are grateful We hope you enjoy reading the book and fi nd it useful whether
for the way that the authors met the deadlines set by us. We this is helping people with diabetes or teaching physicians and
are also grateful for the immense help we have received from other health professionals how best to manage this disease and
our publisher, Wiley - Blackwell. Our Commissioning Editor its complications.
Oliver Walter, who took over from Alison Brown shortly into the
book ’ s development, has provided encouragement, support and Richard I.G. Holt
guidance as has Jennifer Seward, the Development Editor. Often Clive S. Cockram
just at the time when things appeared to be insurmountable, Allan Flyvbjerg
Oliver or Jennifer took steps to get the project moving again. Barry J. Goldstein
xiv
--- Page 17 ---
Foreword
The face of diabetes is forever changing. Scientific knowledge able routinely a century ago. The world pandemic of diabetes is
increases exponentially and our understanding slowly improves described with few populations spared and then each type of
although there are still massive gaps in many fundamental aspects diabetes is described together with what is known of their patho-
of the diabetes story, such as the mechanisms underlying the physiology. Particularly valuable are the essays on non - classical
development of type 2 diabetes. Trying to keep up with all the type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
advances is an ever increasing burden, but with a large array of The management and treatment of diabetes from education
means to achieve this. Many people use the web, both specific through lifestyle modifi cation and the use of oral agents and
websites and more general search engines, but there are still a insulin is dealt with exhaustively with useful chapters on the oft
large number of people who prefer the printed word and the col- ignored psychological and social aspects of the disorder. Different
lection together of an accessible compendium where you can models of care are also well discussed. Complications are dealt
expect to obtain answers to your questions. This volume provides with comprehensively and again the book is of particular value
exactly that; namely a series of up - to - date, well referenced, in going beyond the classical complications and dealing with a
learned articles covering the manifold manifestations of diabetes range of less well defi ned problems found in people with diabetes.
together with the basic underlying science. It is truly comprehen- The book fi nishes with crystal ball gazing: a look at future drugs
sive and I would challenge any reader to find missing aspects for both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, as well as the potential for
of the pathophysiology, treatment and care of people with stem cell therapy, islet cell transplantation and gene therapy, all
diabetes. of which are thought provoking and informative.
T he book begins with a fascinating historical essay which Overall I feel that this volume fulfi ls a major need for anyone
should be read by anybody who picks up the book. It reminds us with an interest in diabetes; it should be available in every setting
that much valuable information is forgotten and many lessons where people with diabetes receive their care and will serve as an
can be learned by going back to pre - internet days! The possibility excellent vade mecum.
of using HbA for the diagnosis of diabetes is discussed refl ecting
1c
a potentially seismic shift in our diagnostic armamentarium that K. George M.M. Alberti
has relied on the measurement of glucose since that became avail- I mperial College London
xv
--- Page 18 ---
List of Abbreviations
AA arachidonic acid BUN blood urea nitrogen
AAA abdominal aortic aneurysm CABG coronary artery bypass grafting
AACE American Association of Clinical CAD coronary artery disease
Endocrinologists CaMK calcium/calmodulin - dependent kinase
AADE American Association of Diabetes Educators cAMP cyclic adenosine monophosphate
ABI ankle brachial index C A- M RSA c ommunity- a ssociated methicillin- r esistant
A CA a cetyl co- e nzyme A Staphylococcus aureus
ACC acetyl - CoA carboxylase CAP Cbl associated protein
ACCORD Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in CAPD continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis
Diabetes CART cocaine and amfetamine - related transcript
ACE American College of Endocrinology CBF cerebral blood fl ow
ACE angiotensin - converting enzyme CBT cognitive – behavioral therapy
ACEi angiotensin - converting enzyme inhibitor CCA calcium - channel antagonist
ACR albumin : creatinine ratio CCK cholecystokinin
ACS acute coronary syndromes CCM Chronic Care Model
ACTH adrenocorticotropic hormone CD celiac disease
A DA A merican Diabetes Association CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
ADASP autoimmune diabetes in adults with slowly CDFC comprehensive diabetic foot examination
progressive β - cell failure CDK cyclin - dependent kinase
ADI acceptable daily intake C EL c arboxyl ester lipase
AGE advanced glycation end - product CETP cholesterol ester transfer protein
AGRP agouti - related peptide CFTR cystic fi brosis transmembrane conductance
ALT alanine aminotransferase regulator
AMI acute myocardial infarction CGM continuous glucose monitoring
AMPK adenosine 5′ - monophosphate - activated protein cGMP cyclic guanosine monophosphate
kinase CGMS continuous glucose monitoring systems
APC antigen - presenting cell CGRP calcitonin gene - related peptide
ARB angiotensin receptor blocker CHD coronary heart disease
AST aspartate aminotransferase CHF congestive heart failure
AT angiotensin CHO Chinese hamster ovary
ATG antithymocyte globulin CI confi dence interval
BB bio - breeding cIMT carotid intima - media thickness
BCG bacille Calmette – Gu é rin CKD chronic kidney disease
BIPSS bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling C ML c arboxymethyl lysine
BMD bone mineral density CN Charcot neuroarthropathy
BMI body mass index CNV copy number variant
B NP B - t ype natriuretic peptide CoA coenzyme A
BP blood pressure COX cyclo - oxygenase
xxvvii
--- Page 19 ---
List of Abbreviations
cPLA cytosolic PLA eNOS endothelial nitric oxide synthase
2 2
CPT carnitine palmitoyltransferase EPA eicosapentaenoic acid
CRH corticotropin releasing hormone EPAC exchange protein activated by cyclic AMP
C RP C - r eactive protein EPC endothelial progenitor cell
CRS congenital rubella syndrome ER endoplasmic reticulum
CSII continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion ERCP endoscopic retrograde
CsA cyclosporine A cholangiopancreatography
C T c omputed tomography ERK extracellular signal - regulated kinase
CTGF connective tissue growth factor E RM e zrin- r adixin- m oesin
CVD cardiovascular disease ESCS electrical spinal cord stimulation
DAG diacylglycerol ESRD end - stage renal disease
DASP Diabetes Antibody Standardization Program ESRF end - stage renal failure
D AWN D iabetes Attitudes, Wishes, and Needs study ET endothelin
D CCT D iabetes Control and Complications Trial ETDRS Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study
DD disc diameter EVAR endovascular aneurysm repair
DEND developmental delay, epilepsy and neonatal FADH fl avine adenine dinucleotide
2
diabetes FAS fatty acid synthase
DEXA dual - energy X - ray absorptiometry FCPD fi brocalculous pancreatic diabetes
DHA docosahexanoic acid FDA Food and Drug Administration
DHEA dehydroepiandrosterone FDG [ 18 F] - 2 - deoxy - 2 - fl uoro - D - glucose
DIDMOAD diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic FDGF fi broblast - derived growth factor
atrophy and deafness FDR fi rst- d egree relative
DIGAMI Diabetes mellitus, Insulin Glucose infusion in FFA free fatty acid
Acute Myocardial Infarction FHWA Federal Highways Administration
DISH diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis FPD fi brous proliferation at the disc
D KA d iabetic ketoacidosis FPE fi brous proliferation elsewhere
D M d iabetic maculopathy FPG fasting plasma glucose
DNSG EASD Diabetes and Nutrition Study Group of the FPIR fi rst - phase insulin release
European Association for the Study of Diabetes FSGS focal segmental glomerular sclerosis
DPN distal symmetrical sensory or sensorimotor FSH follicle stimulating hormone
polyneuropathy GABA γ - aminobutyric acid
DPP Diabetes Prevention Program G AD g lutamine acid decarboxylase
D PP- 4 d ipeptidyl peptidase 4 GAG glycosaminoglycan
DQOL Diabetes Quality of Life GAPDH glyceraldehyde - 3 phosphate dehydrogenase
DR diabetic retinopathy GAS group A streptococcus
D RS D iabetic Retinopathy Study GDM gestational diabetes mellitus
DSA digital subtraction angiography GFA glutamine : fructose - 6 - amidotransferase
DSME diabetes self - management education GFR glomerular fi ltration rate
DVLA Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency GH growth hormone
DVT deep venous thrombosis GHb glycated hemoglobin
DZ dizygotic GHBP growth hormone - binding protein
eAG estimated average glucose measurement GHD growth hormone defi ciency
EASD European Association for the Study of Diabetes GHRH growth hormone - releasing hormone
ECG electrocardiography/electrocardiogram GI glycemic index
ED erectile dysfunction GIP glucose - dependent insulinotropic peptide
EDHF endothelium - derived hyperpolarizing factor GK glucokinase
EDIC Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and GLP glucagon - like peptide
Complications GLUT glucose transporter
EDNOS eating disorder not otherwise specifi ed GMP good manufacturing practice
EEG electroencephalography/electroencephalogram GNSO S - nitrosoglutathione
eGFR estimated glomerular fi ltration rate GP general practitioner
ELISA enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay GRP gastrin - releasing polypeptide
ELISPOT enzyme - linked immunospot assay G stimulatory G - protein
s
EMEA European Medicines Agency GSH glutathione
xvii
--- Page 20 ---
List of Abbreviations
GSK glycogen synthesis kinase IKK β inhibitor κ - B kinase - β
GSSG glutathione disulfi de IL interleukin
GWA genome - wide association INR International Normalized Ratio
GWL genome - wide familial linkage I OB i nsulin- o n- b oard
HAAF hypoglycemia - associated autonomic failure IP inositol 1,4,5 - trisphosphate
3
HAART highly active antiretroviral therapy IPAN intrinsic primary afferent neuron
HBO hyperbaric oxygen IPF insulin promoter factor
H BV h epatitis B virus iPS induced pluripotent cell
H CV h epatitis C virus IR insulin resistance
HDL high density lipoprotein IRE inositol - requiring kinase
HETES hydroxyeicosatetrenoic acids IRE insulin response element
HFCS high - fructose corn syrup IRMA intraretinal microvascular abnormality
HGF hepatocyte growth factor IRS insulin receptor substrate
hGH human recombinant growth hormone ISH International Society of Hypertension
HH hyperosmolar non - ketotic hyperglycemia IUD intrauterine contraceptive device
HIC high income country IVGTT intravenous glucose tolerance test
HIF hypoxia - inducible factor JaK Janus kinase
HLA human leukocyte antigen JDRF Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation
HMa small hemorrhage or microaneurysm JNK c - Jun N - terminal kinase
HMG high mobility group K m M ichaelis constant
H NF h epatic nuclear factor KO knockout
HOMA homeostasis model assessment LADA latent autoimmune diabetes of adults
HONK hyperosmolar non - ketotic coma LADC latent autoimmune diabetes in children
HPA hypothalamic - pituitary - adrenal LADY latent autoimmune diabetes in the young
HPETES hydroperoxyeicosatetrenoic acids LAR leukocyte antigen - related phosphatase
HR hazard ratio LD linkage disequilibrium
hrIFN human recombinant interferon LDL low density lipoprotein
HRT hormone replacement therapy LEAD Liraglutide Effect and Action in Diabetes
HSL hormone sensitive lipase LGV large goods vehicle
HSS hyperosmolar hyperglycemic syndrome LH lactic hydrogenase
IA - 2 insulinoma - associated antigen 2 LI lability index
I AA i nsulin autoantibody LMIC low and middle income countries
IAPP islet amyloid polypeptide LOX lipoxygenase
IBGMS Internet - based glucose monitoring system LPL lipoprotein lipase
I BMIR i mmediate blood mediated infl ammatory LVH left ventricular hypertrophy
reaction MACE major adverse cardiovascular event
ICA islet cell antibody MAPK mitogen activated protein kinase
ICAM intercellular adhesion molecule MBL mannose - binding lectin
ICC interstitial cells of Cajal MCH melanin - concentrating hormone
ICCC Innovative Care for Chronic Conditions MCP metacarpophalangeal
ICSA islet surface antibody MCP monocyte chemotactic protein
IDDM insulin - dependent diabetes mellitus M DI m ultiple daily injection
IDF International Diabetes Federation MELAS mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic
IDMPS International Diabetes Management Practice acidosis and stroke -l ike episodes
Study MEN multiple endocrine neoplasia
IENF intra - epidermal nerve fi ber MHC major histocompatibility complex
IFCC International Federation of Clinical Chemistry M I m yocardial infarction
IFG impaired fasting glucose MIBI methyloxybutylisonitrile
Ig immunoglobulin MIDD maternal inherited diabetes and deafness
IGF insulin - like growth factor MMP matrix metalloproteinase
IGFBP insulin - like growth factor binding protein MnSOD manganese superoxide dismutase
IGF1R insulin - like growth factor 1 receptor MODY maturity - onset diabetes of the young
IGT impaired glucose tolerance MR modifi ed release
IHD ischemic heart disease MRA magnetic resonance angiography
xviii
--- Page 21 ---
List of Abbreviations
M RDM m alnutrition- r elated diabetes mellitus OPG osteoprotegerin
MRI magnetic resonance imaging OR odds ratio
MRSA methacillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus ORP oxygen - regulated protein
MSH melanocyte stimulating hormone PACAP pituitary adenylate cyclase - activating
MSU monosodium urate polypeptide
mTOR mammalian target of rapamycin PAD peripheral arterial disease
MTP microsomal triglyceride transfer protein PAI plasminogen activator inhibitor
MUFA monounsaturated fatty acid PARP poly(ADP - ribose) polymerase
MZ monozygotic PCOS polycystic ovary syndrome
N AA N - a cetyl aspartate PCV passenger - carrying vehicle
NAC N - acetylcysteine PDE phosphodiesterase
NADPH nicotinic acid adenine dinucleotide phosphate PDGF platelet - derived growth factor
NAFLD non - alcoholic fatty liver disease PDK 3 - phosphoinositide - dependent protein kinase
NAION non - arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy PDR proliferative diabetic retinopathy
NASH non - alcoholic steatohepatitis PDX pancreatic duodenal homeobox
NCD non- communicable disease PEG percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy
NDDG National Diabetes Data Group PEPCK phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
NEFA non - esterifi ed fatty acid PET positron emission tomography
NFG normal fasting glucose P FC p erfl urodecalin
NF κB n uclear factor κ B PFC prefrontal cortex
NGF nerve growth factor PGE prostaglandin
NGT nasogastric tube PH pleckstrin homology
NGT normal glucose tolerance PHHI persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of
NHANES National Health and Nutrition Examination infancy
Survey PI protease inhibitor
NICE National Institute for Health and Clinical PI phosphoinositide 3′
3
Excellence P ID p elvic infl ammatory disease
NIDDM non - insulin - dependent diabetes mellitus PIP proximal interphalangeal
NIH National Institutes of Health PIP phosphoinositol 4,5 - bisphosphate
2
NIMGU non - insulin - mediated glucose uptake PIP3 phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5 - trisphosphate
NINDS National Institute of Neurologic Disorders PK protein kinase
NK natural killer P LC p hospholipase C
NLD necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum PLP periodate - lysine - paraformaldehyde
NNH number needed to harm P NDM p ermanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
NNRTI non - nucleoside reverse - transcriptase inhibitor PNMT phenylethanolamine - N - methyltransferase
NNT number needed to treat POMC pro - opiomelanocortin
NO nitric oxide POP progesterone - only pill
N OD n on- o bese diabetic PP pancreatic polypeptide
NOS nitric oxide synthase PPAR peroxisome proliferator - activated receptor
NPDR non - proliferative diabetic retinopathy PPG post - prandial plasma glucose
NPH neutral protamine Hagedorn PPRE peroxisome proliferator response element
NPWT negative pressure wound therapy PRA panel reactive antibody
NPY neuropeptide Y PRH preretinal hemorrhage
NRTI nucleoside reverse - transcriptase inhibitor PTA percutaneous transluminal angioplasty
NSAID non - steroidal anti - infl ammatory drug PTB phosphotyrosine binding
NTD neural tube defect PTDM post - transplantation diabetes mellitus
NVD new vessels on and/or within 1 disc diameter of PTEN phosphatase and tensin homolog
the disc PTSD post - traumatic stress disorder
NVE new vessels elsewhere PTH parathyroid hormone
NYHA New York Heart Association PTP protein tyrosine phosphatase
OCP oral contraceptive pill PVD peripheral vascular disease
OCT optical coherence topography PVN paraventricular nucleus
OGT O- l inked N - acetylglucosamine transferase QALY quality - adjusted life year
OGTT oral glucose tolerance test(ing) QST quantitative sensory testing
xix
--- Page 22 ---
List of Abbreviations
RAGE receptor for advanced glycation end - product T1DM type 1 diabetes mellitus
R AI r apid acting analog T2DM type 2 diabetes mellitus
R ANKL r eceptor activator of nuclear factor κ B ligand TCA tricarboxylic acid
RAS renin angiotensin system TCA tricyclic antidepressant
RBP retinol - binding protein TCC total contact cast
RCAD renal cysts and diabetes syndrome TCC transition case coordinator
RCW removable cast walker T CF t ranscription factor
rhIGF recombinant human insulin - like growth factor TCR T - cell receptor
RMR resting metabolic rate TDI tissue Doppler imaging
ROC receiver operator characteristic TENS transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
ROS reactive oxygen species TG triglyceride
RRT renal replacement therapy TGF transforming growth factor
RT - CGM real - time continuous glucose monitoring TIA transient ischemic attack
SADS seasonal affective depressive syndrome T KA t yrosine kinase activity
SARS severe acute respiratory syndrome TLR toll - like receptor
SCID severe combined immunodefi ciency TNDM transient neonatal diabetes mellitus
S D s tandard deviation TNF tumor necrosis factor
S DF s tromal cell- d erived factor t - PA tissue plasminogen activator
SDH sorbitol dehydrogenase TRAIL tumor necrosis factor related apoptosis inducing
SGLT sodium - glucose co - transporter ligand
SH2 Src homology 2 TSC tuberous sclerosis complex
SHBG sex hormone - binding globulin TSH thyroid stimulating hormone
SHIP SH2 - containing inositol phosphatase TZD thiazolidinedione
SHORT short atature, hyperextensibility of joints, ocular UAE urinary albumin excretion
depression, Reiger anamoly, teething delay UCP uncoupling protein
(syndrome) UDP uridine diphosphate
SHP2 SH2 - domain - containing tyrosine phosphatase 2 UKPDS UK Prospective Diabetes Study
SMBG self - monitoring of blood glucose USDA US Department of Agriculture
SMI serious mental illness UT urotensin
SMR standardized mortality ratio UTI urinary tract infection
SNARE soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive factor UW University of Wisconsin solution
attachment protein receptor VADT Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial
SNP single nucleotide polymorphism VB venous beading
SNRI serotonin noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor VCAM vascular cell adhesion molecule
SOCS suppressor of cytokine signaling V EGF v ascular endothelial growth factor
SoHo sorbin homology VH vitreous hemorrhage
SPECT single photon emission computed tomography VIP vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
s RAGE s oluble receptor for advanced glycation VLCD very low calorie diet
end- p roduct VLDL very low density lipoprotein
SREBP sterol regulatory element - binding protein VNTR variable number tandem repeat
SSRI selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor V˙ O maximal oxygen consumption
2max
SST somatostatin VPT vibration perception threshold
SSTR somatostatin receptor VSMC vascular smooth muscle cell
STAT signal transducer and activator of transcription WHI Women ’ s Health Initiative
SUR sulfonylurea receptor W HO W orld Health Organization
t half - life
1/2
xx
--- Page 23 ---
1
Diabetes in its Historical and
Social Context
--- Page 24 ---

--- Page 25 ---
1
The History of Diabetes Mellitus
Robert B. Tattersall
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
Keypoints
(cid:129) Polyuric diseases have been described for over 3500 years. The name (cid:129) The primary sequence of insulin was reported in 1955 by Sanger and
“ diabetes” comes from the Greek word for a syphon; the sweet taste the three- dimensional structure by Hodgkin in 1969. Proinsulin was
of diabetic urine was recognized at the beginning of the fi rst discovered by Steiner in 1967, and the sequence of the human insulin
millennium, but the adjective “ mellitus ” (honeyed) was only added by gene by Bell in 1980. Yalow and Berson invented the
Rollo in the late 18th century. radioimmunoassay for insulin in 1956. The presence of insulin receptors
(cid:129) The sugar in diabetic urine was identifi ed as glucose by Chevreul in was deduced in 1971 by Freychet, and the receptor protein was
1815. In the 1840s, Bernard showed that glucose was normally present isolated in 1972 by Cuatrecasas.
in blood, and showed that it was stored in the liver (as glycogen) for (cid:129) The various types of diabetic retinopathy were described in the second
secretion into the bloodstream during fasting. half of the 19th century as were the symptoms of neuropathy.
(cid:129) In 1889, Minkowski and von Mering reported that pancreatectomy Albuminuria was noted as a common abnormality in patients with
caused severe diabetes in the dog. In 1893, Laguesse suggested that diabetes in the 19th century and a unique type of kidney disease was
the pancreatic “ islets ” described by Langerhans in 1869 produced an described in 1936 by Kimmelstiel and Wilson. The concept of a specifi c
internal secretion that regulated glucose metabolism. diabetic angiopathy was developed by Lundbaek in the early 1950s.
(cid:129) Insulin was discovered in 1921 by Banting, Best, Macleod and Collip in (cid:129) Milestones in insulin pharmacology have included the invention of
acid- ethanol extracts of pancreas. It was fi rst used for treatment in delayed- action preparations in the 1930s and 1940s; synthetic human
January 1922. insulin in 1979; and in the 1990s novel insulin analogs by recombinant
(cid:129) Diabetes was subdivided on clinical grounds into diab è te maigre (lean DNA technology.
subjects) and diab è te gras (obese) by Lancereaux in 1880, and during (cid:129) The fi rst sulfonylurea carbutamide was introduced in 1955, followed by
the 1930s by Falta and Himsworth into insulin- s ensitive and insulin- tolbutamide in 1957 and chlorpropamide in 1960. The biguanide
insensitive types. These classifi cations were the forerunners of the phenformin became available in 1959 and metformin in 1960.
etiological classifi cation into type 1 (insulin- d ependent) and type 2 (cid:129) That improved glucose control in both type 1 and type 2 diabetes was
(non - insulin - dependent) diabetes. benefi cial was proved by the Diabetes Control and Complications Trial
(cid:129) Insulin resistance and β - cell failure, the fundamental defects of type 2 (1993) and the UK Prospective Diabetes Study (1998).
diabetes, have been investigated by many researchers. The “ i nsulin (cid:129) Landmarks in the treatment of complications include photocoagulation
clamp” method devised by Andres and DeFronzo was the fi rst accurate for retinopathy fi rst described by Meyer - Schwickerath; the importance
technique for measuring insulin action. Maturity- o nset diabetes of the of blood pressure to slow the progression of nephropathy
young was described as a distinct variant of type 2 diabetes by (demonstrated by Mogensen and Parving); the introduction of low - dose
Tattersall in 1974. insulin in the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis in the 1970s; and
(cid:129) Lymphocytic infi ltration of the islets (insulitis) was described as early as improvements in the care of pregnant women with diabetes pioneered
1901 and highlighted in 1965 by Gepts who suggested that it might by White and Pedersen.
be a marker of autoimmunity. Islet cell antibodies were discovered by
Doniach and Bottazzo in 1979.
in an Egyptian papyrus dating from c. 1550 bc , discovered by
Ancient t imes Georg Ebers (Figure 1.1 ), and a clearly recognizable description
of what would now be called type 1 diabetes was given by Aretaeus
Diseases with the cardinal features of diabetes mellitus were rec- of Cappadocia in the 2nd century a d (Figure 1.2 a). Aretaeus was
ognized in antiquity (Table 1.1 ). A polyuric state was described the fi rst to use the term “ diabetes, ” from the Greek word for a
syphon, “ because the fl uid does not remain in the body, but uses
Textbook of Diabetes, 4th edition. Edited by R. Holt, C. Cockram, the man ’ s body as a channel whereby to leave it. ” His graphic
A. Flyvbjerg and B. Goldstein. © 2010 Blackwell Publishing. account of the disease highlighted the incessant fl ow of urine,
3
--- Page 26 ---
Table 1.1 Milestones in the clinical descriptions of diabetes and its
complications.
Clinical features of diabetes
Ebers papyrus (Egypt, 1500 B C ) Polyuric state
Sushrut and Charak (India, 5th Sugary urine; thin and obese
century BC ) patients distinguished
Aretaeus (Cappadocia, 2nd Polyuric state named “ diabetes ”
century A D )
Chen Chuan (China, 7th century) Sugary urine
Avicenna (Arabia, 10th century A D ) Sugary urine; gangrene and
impotence as complications
Diabetic ketoacidosis
William Prout (England, Diabetic coma
1810 – 1820)
Adolf Kussmaul (Germany, 1874) Acidotic breathing
Hyperlipidemia
Albert Heyl (Philadelphia, 1880) Lipemia retinalis
Retinopathy
Eduard von Jaeger (Germany, 1855) General features
Stephen Mackenzie and Edward Microaneurysms
Nettleship (England, 1879)
Edward Nettleship (England, 1888) New vessels, beading of retinal veins
Figure 1.1 The Ebers papyrus. Courtesy of the Wellcome Library, London.
Julius Hirschberg (Germany, 1890) Classifi cation of lesions; specifi c to
diabetes
Neuropathy and foot disease
John Rollo (England, 1797) Neuropathic symptoms
Marchal de Calvi (France, 1864) Neuropathy is a complication of (b)
diabetes
William Ogle (England, 1866) Ocular nerve palsies in diabetes
Frederick Pavy (England, 1885) Peripheral neuropathy
Julius Althaus (Germany, 1890) Mononeuropathy
Thomas Davies Pryce (England, Perforating foot ulcers
1887)
Nephropathy
Wilhelm Griesinger (Germany, Renal disease in patients with
1859) diabetes
Paul Kimmelstiel and Clifford Wilson Glomerulosclerosis associated with
(USA, 1936) heavy proteinuria
(a)
Diabetes is a dreadful affliction, not very frequent among
men, being a melting down of the flesh and limbs into
urine. The patients never stop making water and the flow is
incessant, like the opening of aqueducts. Life is short,
unpleasant and painful, thirst unquenchable, drinking
excessive, and disproportionate to the large quantity of
urine, for yet more urine is passed. One cannot stop them
either from drinking or making water. If for a while they
abstain from drinking, their mouths become parched and
their bodies dry; the viscera seem scorched up, the patients
are affected by nausea, restlessness and a burning thirst, and
within a short time, they expire.
Figure 1.2 (a) Clinical description of diabetes by Aretaeus of Cappadocia (2nd century A D ). Adapted from Papaspyros NS (1952) T he History of Diabetes Mellitus .
(b) Sushrut (Susrata), an Indian physician who wrote medical texts with Charak (Charuka) between 500 B C and 400 BC .
4
--- Page 27 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
unquenchable thirst, the “ melting down of the fl esh and limbs “ diabetes was a disease so rare among the ancients that many
into urine ” and short survival. famous physicians made no mention of it … but in our age, given
The Hindu physicians, Charak and Sushrut, who wrote between to good fellowship and guzzling down of unallayed wine, we meet
400 and 500 b c , were probably the fi rst to recognize the sweetness with examples and instances enough, I may say daily, of this
of diabetic urine (Figure 1.2 b). Indeed, the diagnosis was made disease. ” He described the urine as being “ wonderfully sweet like
by tasting the urine or noting that ants congregated round it. sugar or honey ” but did not consider that this might be because
Charak and Sushrut noted that the disease was most prevalent in it contained sugar.
those who were indolent, overweight and gluttonous, and who The fi rst description of hyperglycemia was in a paper published
indulged in sweet and fatty foods. Physical exercise and liberal in 1776 by Matthew Dobson (1735 – 1784) of Liverpool (Figure
quantities of vegetables were the mainstays of treatment in the 1.3 ) [2] . He found that the serum as well as the urine of his patient
obese, while lean people, in whom the disease was regarded as Peter Dickonson (who passed 28 pints of urine a day) tasted
more serious, were given a nourishing diet. The crucial fact that sweet. Moreover, he evaporated the urine to “ a white cake [which]
diabetic urine tasted sweet was also emphasized by Arabic medical smelled sweet like brown sugar, neither could it by the taste be
texts from the 9 – 11th centuries a d , notably in the medical ency- distinguished from sugar. ” Dobson concluded that the kidneys
clopedia written by Avicenna (980 – 1037). excreted sugar and that it was not “ formed in the secretory organ
but previously existed in the serum of the blood.”
The Edinburgh - trained surgeon, John Rollo (d . 1809) was the
The 17th and 18th c enturies fi rst to apply the adjective “ mellitus ” (from the Latin word
meaning “ honey ” ). He also achieved fame with his “ animal diet, ”
In Europe, diabetes was neglected until Thomas Willis (1621 – which became the standard treatment for most of the 19th
1675) wrote Diabetes, or the Pissing Evil [1] . According to him, century. Rollo thought that sugar was formed in the stomach
Figure 1.3 F rontispiece and opening page of the paper by Matthew Dobson (1776), in which he described the sweet taste of both urine and serum from a patient with
diabetes [2] .
5
--- Page 28 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
Figure 1.5 C laude Bernard (1813 – 1878). Courtesy of the Wellcome Institute
Library, London.
Figure 1.4 Extract from John Rollo ’ s account of two cases of diabetes (1797).
Rollo was well aware of the problem of non- c ompliance. Note that “t he patient
introduced by Trommer in 1841, Moore in 1844 and – the best
was strongly remonstrated with, and told of the consequences of repeated
known – Fehling in 1848. Measurement of blood glucose could
deviations. ” Courtesy of the Wellcome Library, London.
only be done by skilled chemists but needed so much blood that
it was rarely used in either clinical care or research. It only became
from vegetables, and concluded that the obvious solution was a practicable with the introduction in 1913 of a micromethod by
diet of animal food. Thus, the regimen described in his 1797 the Norwegian - born physician Ivar Christian Bang (1869 – 1918)
book, An Account of Two Cases of the Diabetes Mellitus [3] , and it was the ability to measure glucose repeatedly which led to
allowed his patient Captain Meredith to have for dinner “ Game development of the glucose tolerance test between 1913 and 1915.
or old meats which have been long kept; and as far as the stomach Glucose metabolism was clarifi ed by the work of Claude
may bear, fat and rancid old meats, as pork. ” Rollo was probably Bernard (1813 – 1878) [5] , the Frenchman whose numerous dis-
the fi rst to note the diffi culty that some patients fi nd in adhering coveries have given him a special place in the history of physiol-
to treatment – a diffi culty he blamed for the death of his second ogy (Figure 1.5 ). When Bernard began work in 1843, the prevailing
patient (Figure 1.4 ). theory was that sugar could only be synthesized by plants, and
that animal metabolism broke down substances originally made
in plants. It was also thought that the blood only contained sugar
The 19th c entury after meals, or in pathologic states such as diabetes. Between 1846
and 1848, Bernard reported that glucose was present in the blood
In 1815, the French chemist Michel Chevreul (1786 – 1889) proved of normal animals, even when starved. He also found higher
that the sugar in diabetic urine was glucose [4] . In the middle of concentrations of glucose in the hepatic than in the portal vein,
the century, tasting the urine to make the diagnosis was super- and “ enormous quantities ” of a starch - like substance in the liver
seded by chemical tests for reducing agents such as glucose as which could be readily converted into sugar. He called this “ gly-
6
--- Page 29 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
Figure 1.7 Paul Langerhans (1847 – 1888). Courtesy of the Wellcome Institute
Library, London.
that the dog, previously house - trained, was now incontinent of
urine. Minkowski realized the signifi cance of the polyuria, and
tested the dog ’ s urine.
Possible explanations for the role of the pancreas were that it
removed a diabetogenic toxin, or produced an internal secretion
Figure 1.6 Oskar Minkowski (1858 – 1931).
that controlled carbohydrate metabolism. The concept of
“ internal secretions ” had been publicized in June 1889, by the
cogen ” (i.e. sugar - forming) and regarded it as analogous to starch well - known physiologist Charles - É douard Brown - S é quard
in plants. His hypothesis – the “ glycogenic ” theory – was that (1817– 1894), who claimed to have rejuvenated himself by injec-
sugar absorbed from the intestine was converted in the liver into tions of testicular extract [9] . It was given further credence in
glycogen and then constantly released into the blood during 1891, when Murray reported that myxoedema could be cured by
fasting. sheep thyroid extract by injection or orally.
A nother discovery by Bernard made a great impression in an In 1893, Gustave Laguesse suggested that the putative internal
era when the nervous control of bodily functions was a scientifi - secretion of the pancreas was produced by the “ islands ” of cells
cally fashionable concept. He found that a lesion in the fl oor of scattered through the gland’ s parenchyma [ 10], which had been
the fourth ventricle produced temporary hyperglycemia ( piq û re discovered in 1869 by the 22 - year - old Paul Langerhans (1847 –
diabetes) [ 6]. This fi nding spawned a long period in which 1888) (Figure 1.7 ). Langerhans had described these clusters of
nervous infl uences were thought to be important causes of dia- cells, having teased them out from the general pancreatic tissue,
betes; indeed, one piece of “ evidence ” – cited by J.J.R. Macleod but had not speculated about their possible function [11] ; it was
as late as 1914 – was that diabetes was more common among Laguesse who named them the “ islets of Langerhans. ” At this
engine drivers than other railway workers because of the mental time, the glucose - lowering internal secretion of the islets was still
strain involved [7] . hypothetical, but in 1909 the Belgian Jean de Meyer named it
In the fi rst part of the 19th century the cause of diabetes was a insuline (from the Latin for “ island ” ) [12] .
mystery, because autopsy usually did not show any specifi c It would be wrong to give the impression that Minkowski ’ s
lesions. A breakthrough came in 1889 when Oskar Minkowski experiments immediately established the pancreatic origin of dia-
(Figure 1.6 ) and Josef von Mering (1849 – 1908) reported that betes. In fact, during the next two decades, it was widely agreed
pancreatectomy in the dog caused severe diabetes [ 8]. This was that diabetes was a heterogeneous disorder with various subtypes,
serendipitous, because they were investigating fat metabolism; it and that its pathogenesis involved at least three organs: the brain,
is said that the laboratory technician mentioned to Minkowski pancreas and liver [13] . The discovery by Blum in 1901 that injec-
7
--- Page 30 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
Figure 1.8 P ictures from J aeger ’ s Atlas of the
Optic Fundus , 1869 [14] . Top left: Bright ’ s disease.
Top right: Jaeger ’ s retinitis hemorrhagica is now
recognized as central retinal vein occlusion. Bottom
left: A 22 -y ear - old man with suspected diabetes.
Bottom right: Central retinal artery occlusion.
Courtesy of W.B. Saunders.
tion of an adrenal extract caused glycosuria implicated other more like hypertensive retinopathy. In 1879, Stephen Mackenzie
glands, and led to the “ polyglandular theory ” of Carl von Noorden (1844– 1909) and Sir Edward Nettleship (1845 – 1913) found
(Vienna), who proposed that the thyroid, pancreas, adrenals and microaneurysms in fl at preparations of the retina and, in 1888,
parathyroids controlled carbohydrate metabolism. Nettleship described new vessels and the beaded appearance of
retinal veins [15] . The full picture of diabetic retinopathy was
Clinical d iabetes in the 19th c entury described in 1890 by Julius Hirschberg (1843 – 1925) who was the
Doctors in the 19th century were therapeutically impotent; their fi rst to claim that it was specifi c to diabetes [ 16].
main role was as taxonomists who described symptom complexes Neuropathic symptoms in patients with diabetes had been
and the natural history of disease. As a result, most of the major mentioned by Rollo at the end of the 18th century, and in 1864
complications of diabetes were well described before 1900. Charles Marchal de Calvi (1815 – 1873) concluded that nerve
Eduard von Jaeger (1818 – 1884) is credited with the fi rst damage was a specifi c complication of diabetes. In 1885, the
description of diabetic retinopathy, in his beautiful Atlas of Guy ’ s Hospital physician, Frederick Pavy (1829 – 1911), gave a
Diseases of the Ocular Fundus , published in 1869 [14] . In fact, the description of neuropathic symptoms which would grace any
features illustrated (Figure 1.8 ), from a 22 - year - old patient, look modern textbook [ 17]:
8
--- Page 31 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
“ The usual account given by these patients of their condition is that features of diabetic kidney disease and the importance of renal
they cannot feel properly in their legs, that their feet are numb, that complications were not reported until the 1930s.
their legs seem too heavy – as one patient expressed it, “ as if he had In the latter part of the 19th century it was becoming apparent
20 l b weights on his legs and a feeling as if his boots were great deal that there were at least two clinically distinct forms of diabetes.
too large for his feet. ” Darting or “ lightning ” pains are often com- In 1880, the French physician Etienne Lancereaux (1829 – 1910)
plained of. Or there may be hyperaesthesia, so that a mere pinching identifi ed lean and obese patients as having diab è te maigre and
of the skin gives rise to great pain; or it may be the patient is unable diab è te gras [20] , and this observation laid the foundations for
to bear the contact of the seam of the dress against the skin on account subsequent etiologic classifi cations of the disease.
of the suffering it causes. Not infrequently there is deep- s eated pain
located, as the patient describes it, in the marrow of the bones which
are tender on being grasped, and I have noticed that these pains are The 20th c entury
generally worse at night. ”
Murray ’ s cure of myxoedema in 1891 led to a belief that pancre-
Pavy also recorded unusual presentations, including a 67 - year - atic extract would soon result in a cure for diabetes, but, in the
old who complained of “ lightning pains on the right side of the face of repeated failures over the next 30 years, even believers in
waist ” and cases in which the third nerve was affected with an antidiabetic internal secretion were depressed about the likeli-
“ dropped lid and external squint ” [18] . hood of isolating it, and diverted their attention to diet as a treat-
Kidney disease was known to be relatively common in diabetes. ment for the disease.
In 1859, Wilhelm Griesinger (1817 – 1868) reported 64 autopsies Best known was the starvation regimen of Frederick Madison
in adults, half of whom had renal changes which he attributed to Allen (1876 – 1964), which Joslin (Figure 1.9 ) described in 1915 as
hypertension and atherosclerosis [19] ; however, the histologic the greatest advance since Rollo ’ s time [21] . This approach was
(a) (b)
Figure 1.9 E lliott P. Joslin (1869 – 1962), arguably the most famous diabetes specialist of the 20th century and the frontispiece to his 1916 textbook [22] . Courtesy of
the Wellcome Library, London.
9
--- Page 32 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
an extreme application of one that had been proposed as early as Thompson, who had been on the Allen starvation regimen since
1875 by Apollinaire Bouchardat (1806 – 1886), who advocated 1919 and weighed only 30 kg (Figure 1.12 ). After the fi rst injec-
intensive exercise and “ manger le moins possible . ” Starvation tion, his blood glucose level fell slightly, but his symptoms were
treatment did work in a limited sense, in that some patients could unchanged and he developed a sterile abscess. On January 23, he
survive for many months or even years, instead of a few weeks or was given another extract prepared by Collip, and this normalized
months with untreated type 1 diabetes. The quality of life, his blood glucose by the next morning; further injections over the
however, was very poor, and some patients died of malnutrition next 10 days led to marked clinical improvement and complete
rather than diabetes. In 1921, Carl von Noorden (1858 – 1944) – elimination of glycosuria and ketonuria. Initial clinical results in
proponent of the “ oatmeal cure ” – turned away in disapproval seven cases were published in the March 1922 issue of the
when he saw Joslin ’ s prize patient, 17 - year - old Ruth A, who at Canadian Medical Association Journal [27] , which concluded
just over 1.52 m in height weighed only 24.5 kg (a body mass dramatically that:
index of 10.6 kg/m 2 ). 1 Blood sugar can be markedly reduced, even to normal
values;
Discovery of i nsulin 2 Glycosuria can be abolished;
Many attempts were made between 1889 and 1921 to isolate the 3 T he acetone bodies can be made to disappear from the
elusive internal secretion of the pancreas. These largely failed urine;
because the extracts were inactive or had unacceptable side 4 The respiratory quotient shows evidence of increased utiliza-
effects; some preparations may have had limited biologic activity, tion of carbohydrates;
but this was not recognized, either because hypoglycemia was 5 A defi nite improvement is observed in the general condition
misinterpreted as a toxic reaction or because blood glucose was of these patients and, in addition, the patients themselves report
not measured. Those who came closest were the Berlin physician, a subjective sense of well - being and increased vigor for a period
Georg Zuelzer (1840 – 1949) in 1907 [23] , Ernest Scott (1877 – following the administration of these preparations.
1966) in Chicago in 1911 [24] and Nicolas Paulesco (1869 – 1931) The term “ insulin ” was coined by Macleod, who was unaware
in Romania in 1920 – 1921 [25] (Figure 1.10 ). of de Meyer ’ s earlier suggestion of insuline . News of its miracu-
The story of how insulin was discovered in Toronto in 1921 is lous effects spread astonishingly rapidly [28] . In 1922, there were
well known, at least superfi cially (Figure 1.11 ). A young ortho- only 19 references in the world literature to “ insulin ” or equiva-
pedic surgeon, Frederick Banting, inspired after reading an article lent terms such as “ pancreatic extract ” ; by the end of 1923, there
by the pathologist Moses Barron (1884 – 1975), wondered whether were 320 new reports, and a further 317 were published during
the antidiabetic pancreatic principle was digested by trypsin the fi rst 6 months of 1924.
during extraction, and decided to prevent this loss by ligating By October 1923, insulin was available widely throughout
the pancreatic duct, thus causing the exocrine tissue to dege- North America and Europe. International recognition followed
nerate. He approached the Professor of Physiology in Toronto, rapidly for its discoverers, and the 1923 Nobel Prize for Physiology
J.J.R. Macleod, an authority on carbohydrate metabolism, who or Medicine was awarded jointly to Banting and Macleod. Banting
poured scorn on the idea and suggested that the only likely was angered by the decision, and announced publicly that he
outcome would be “ a negative result of great physiological would share his prize with Best, whereupon Macleod decided to
importance. ” do the same with Collip.
Eventually, Macleod relented and installed Banting in a
rundown laboratory, later leaving for Scotland and a fi shing The p ostinsulin e ra
holiday. A student, Charles Best, was chosen by the toss of a coin It was confi dently anticipated that insulin would do for diabetes
to help Banting. Within 6 months of this unpromising start, in the young what thyroid extract had done for myxoedema, but
Banting and Best (referred to in Toronto academic circles as B 2 ) it soon became obvious that insulin was a very different type of
had discovered the most important new therapy since the treatment. Thyroid was given once a day by mouth and at a fi xed
antisyphilitic agent Salvarsan. These events are described in detail dosage. Insulin had to be injected in measured amounts which
in the excellent book by Michael Bliss [ 26]. varied from day to day, and carried the ever - present danger of
T heir approach began with the injection of extracts of atro- hypoglycemia. One often reads that insulin “ revolutionized ” the
phied pancreas (prepared according to Macleod ’ s suggestions) treatment of diabetes; it did so in the sense that it saved the lives
into dogs rendered diabetic by pancreatectomy). Subsequently, of many who would otherwise have died, but its unforeseen effect
they discovered that active extracts could be obtained from beef was to transform an acute, rapidly fatal illness into a chronic
pancreas which Best obtained from the abbatoir. The extraction disease with serious long - term complications. For example, only
procedure (using ice - cold acid - ethanol) was greatly refi ned by 2% of deaths among Joslin’ s young patients with diabetes before
James B. (Bert) Collip, a biochemist who was visiting Toronto on 1937 were caused by kidney disease, while over 50% dying
sabbatical leave. between 1944 and 1950 had advanced renal failure. Strategies to
The fi rst clinical trial of insulin (using an extract made by avoid and prevent the chronic complications of diabetes remain
Best) took place on January 11, 1922, on 14 - year - old Leonard important scientifi c and clinical priorities today.
10
--- Page 33 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
(a) (b)
(c)
Figure 1.10 (a) Georg Zuelzer (1840 – 1949) and (b) the title page from his paper (1907) reporting that a pancreatic extract reduced glycosuria in pancreatectomized
dogs [23] (top). (c) Nicolas Paulesco (1869– 1 931).
The rest of this chapter highlights some developments Causes and n atural h istory of d iabetes
that can be regarded as landmarks in the understanding The recognition that diabetes was not a single disease was impor-
and management of the disease: to some extent, this is a tant in initiating research that has helped to unravel the causes of
personal choice, and it is obvious from the other chapters in hyperglycemia.
this book that the “ history ” of diabetes is being rewritten all The broad etiologic subdivision into type 1 (juvenile - onset, or
the time. insulin - dependent) and type 2 diabetes (maturity - onset, or
11
--- Page 34 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
Figure 1.11 The discoverers of insulin. Clockwise
from top left: Frederick G. Banting (1891 – 1941);
James B. Collip (1892 – 1965); J.J.R. Macleod
(1876 – 1935); and Charles H. Best (1899 – 1978).
Courtesy of the Fisher Rare Book Library, University
of Toronto.
non - insulin - dependent) stemmed ultimately from Lancereaux ’ s
diab è te maigre and d iab è te gras distinction, as well as observations
soon after the discovery of insulin that some patients did not react
“ normally ” to insulin. In the 1930s, Wilhelm Falta (1875 – 1950)
in Vienna [29] and Harold Himsworth (1905 – 93) in London [30]
proposed that some individuals with diabetes were more sensitive
to the glucose - lowering effects of insulin, whereas others were
insulin - insensitive, or insulin - resistant. The former were usually
thin and required insulin to prevent ketoacidosis, while the latter
were older, obese and ketosis - resistant.
The “ insulin clamp ” technique developed in the 1970s by
Ralph DeFronzo e t al . [31] in the USA was the fi rst to measure
rigorously the hypoglycemic action of insulin, and has led to
countless studies of insulin resistance and its relationship to type
2 diabetes and vascular disease. Various groups, including
DeFronzo ’ s, have helped to clarify the role of β- c ell failure in type
2 diabetes, and how it relates to insulin resistance. Maturity - onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) was recognized in 1974 by Robert
Tattersall ( b. 1943) as a distinct, dominantly inherited subset of
Figure 1.12 Leonard Thompson, the fi rst patient to receive insulin, in January type 2 diabetes [32] ; since 1993, fi ve different molecular defects
1922. Courtesy of the Fisher Rare Book Library, University of Toronto. have been identifi ed in this condition.
12
--- Page 35 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
The causes of the profound β- c ell loss that led to the severe
Table 1.2 Milestones in the scientifi c understanding of diabetes and its
insulin defi ciency of type 1 diabetes remained a mystery for a long
complications.
time. “ Insulitis ” , predominantly lymphocytic infi ltration of the
islets, was noted as early as 1901 by Eugene L. Opie (1873 – 1971) Matthew Dobson (England, 1776) Diabetic serum contains sugar
and colleagues [33] , but because it was apparently very rare, Michel Chevreul (France, 1815) The sugar in diabetic urine is glucose
found in only six of 189 cases studied by Anton Weichselbaum Claude Bernard (France, 1850s) Glucose stored in liver glycogen and
(1845 –1 920) in 1910, its importance was not appreciated. The secreted during fasting
possible role of insulitis in β - cell destruction was not suggested Wilhelm Petters (Germany, 1857) Diabetic urine contains acetone
until 1965, by the Belgian Willy Gepts (1922 – 1991) [34] . The Paul Langerhans (Germany, 1869) Pancreatic islets described
Adolf Kussmaul (Germany, 1874) Describes ketoacidosis
theory that type 1 diabetes results from autoimmune destruction
of the β cells was fi rst made in 1979 by Deborah Doniach (1912 – Oskar Minkowski and Josef von Pancreatectomy causes diabetes in the
Mering (Germany, 1889) dog
2004) and GianFranco Bottazzo ( b. 1946) [35] . Unlike other
Gustave Edouard Laguesse (France, Glucose - lowering pancreatic secretion
autoimmune endocrine diseases where the autoantibody persists,
1893) produced by islets
islet cell antibodies (ICA) turned out to be transient and disap-
M.A. Lane (USA, 1907) Distinguished A and B islet cells
peared within a year of the onset of diabetes. An unexpected Jean de Meyer (Belgium, 1909) Hypothetical islet secretion named
fi nding from the Barts – Windsor prospective study of the epide- “i nsuline ”
miology of diabetes in childhood started by Andrew Cudworth Frederick Banting, Charles Best, Isolation of insulin
(1939 – 1982) was that ICA could be detected in siblings of young J.J.R. Macleod, James Collip
people with diabetes up to 10 years before they developed appar- (Canada, 1922)
ently acute - onset diabetes. This long lead - in period raised the Richard Murlin (USA, 1923) Discovered and named glucagon
possibilty of an intervention to prevent continuing β - cell destruc- Bernado Houssay (Argentina, 1924) Hypophysectomy enhances insulin
sensitivity
tion. Cyclosporine in people with newly diagnosed type 1 diabetes
Frederick Sanger (England, 1955) Determined primary sequence of
prolongs the honeymoon period but without permanent benefi t
insulin
once the drug is stopped [36] . Nicotinamide and small doses of
W.W. Bromer (USA, 1956) Determined primary sequence of
insulin (together with many other interventions) prevent diabetes
glucagon
in the non - obese diabetic (NOD) mouse but were without effect Rosalyn Yalow and Solomon Berson Discovered radioimmunoassay for
in relatives of people with type 1 diabetes with high titers of ICA (USA, 1959) insulin
[37,38] . Donald Steiner (USA, 1967) Discovered proinsulin
From 1967, when Paul Lacy (1924 – 2005) showed that it was Dorothy Hodgkin (England, 1969) Determined three - dimensional
possible to “ c ure” diabetes in inbred rats with an islet cell trans- structure of insulin
plant, it always seemed that the problem of islet cell transplanta- Pierre Freychet (USA, 1971) Characterized insulin receptors
Pedro Cuatrecasas (USA, 1972) Isolated insulin receptor protein
tion in humans was about to be solved. Hope was rekindled in
Axel Ullrich (USA, 1977) Reported sequence of rat insulin
2000 by a team in Edmonton, Canada. After 5 years 80% of their
Ralph DeFronzo and Reuben Andres Invented insulin clamp technique
transplanted patients were producing some endogenous insulin
(USA, 1979)
but only 10% could manage without any injected insulin [39] .
Graham Bell (USA, 1980) Reported sequence of human
insulin gene
Chronic d iabetic c omplications
It had been assumed that arteriosclerosis caused chronic diabetic
complications, but this notion was challenged by two papers pub-
lished in the mid - 1930s, which pointed to specifi c associations of tures of hypertension, heavy albuminuria with “ oedema of the
diabetes with retinal and renal disease (Table 1.2 ). In 1934, Henry nephrotic type,” and renal failure. In fact, this paper led to con-
Wagener (1890 – 1961) and Russell Wilder (1885 – 1959) from the siderable confusion during the next 15 years: according to one
Mayo Clinic reported patients who had retinal hemorrhages but writer, the “ Kimmelstiel – Wilson syndrome ” came to mean all
no other clinical evidence of vascular disease [40] , and concluded things to all men [42] . Nonetheless, it was signifi cant because it
that “ The very existence of retinitis in cases in which patients have drew attention to a specifi c diabetic renal disease.
no other signs of vascular disease must mean that diabetes alone Acceptance of the concept that diabetic angiopathy was specifi c
does something to injure the fi ner arterioles or venules of the to the disease owed much to the work of Knud Lundb æ k of
retina, probably the latter. ” Aarhus in Denmark (Figure 1.14 ), who published his fi ndings in
In 1936, Paul Kimmelstiel (1900 – 1970) and Clifford Wilson a book in 1953 – 1954 and a paper in the Lancet in 1954 [43,44] .
(1906 – 1997) described the striking histologic fi nding of “ inter- His key arguments were that long - standing diabetic vascular
capillary glomerulosclerosis ” – large hyaline nodules in the disease differed fundamentally from atherosclerosis, in that both
glomeruli – in the kidneys of eight subjects at autopsy (Figure sexes were equally affected and that microaneurysms, ocular
1.13 ) [41] . Seven of the eight patients had a known history of phlebopathy and Kimmelstiel – Wilson nodules were unique to
diabetes, and Kimmelstiel and Wilson noted the common fea- diabetes and usually occurred together.
13
--- Page 36 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
Figure 1.13 Nodular glomerulosclerosis. Figure from the paper by Kimmelstiel
Figure 1.14 Knud Lundb æ k (1912 – 1995). Courtesy of Dr Carl Erik Mogensen.
and Wilson, 1936 [41] . Courtesy of the British Medical Association Library.
T he molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying diabetic
Table 1.3 Milestones in the understanding of the causes of diabetes.
tissue damage remain controversial after decades of intensive
research. One of the early landmarks in this fi eld was the work of
Thomas Willis (England, 17th Overindulgence in food and drink
J.H. Kinoshita (b . 1922) during the early 1970s, which pointed to
century)
the involvement of the polyol pathway in the formation of dia- Thomas Cawley (England, 1788) Pancreatic stones cause diabetes
betic cataracts [45] . Oskar Minkowski and Josef von Pancreatectomy causes diabetes in
Mering (Germany, 1889) the dog
Physiology Etienne Lancereaux (France, 1880) Lean and obese diabetic subtypes
In 1907, M.A. Lane, a student of Robert Bensley (1867 – 1956), distinguished
Professor of Antatomy in Chicago, used conventional histologic Eugene Opie (USA, 1900) Hyaline degeneration (amyloidosis) of
islets (type 2 diabetes)
techniques to distinguish two different cell types in the islet of
Eugene Opie (USA, 1910) Lymphocytic infi ltration of islets
Langerhans, which he termed A and B [46] . The hormones
( “ insulitis ” ; type 1 diabetes)
secreted by these respective cell types were not identifi ed until
Wilhelm Falta (Vienna) and Harold Distinguished insulin - resistant and
much later (Table 1.2 ). Frank Young (1908 – 1988) and colleagues
Himsworth (England; early 1930s) insulin - sensitive forms of diabetes
reported in 1938 that injections of anterior pituitary extract could Willy Gepts (Belgium, 1965) Suggested that insulitis caused β - cell
induce permanent diabetes in the dog, and that this was accom-
destruction (type 1 diabetes)
panied by selective degranulation and loss of the β - cells [47] ; it Deborah Doniach and GianFranco Suggested that insulin - dependent
was surmised that these cells produced insulin, and this was Bottazzo (England, 1979) diabetes is an autoimmune disease
fi nally confi rmed using immuno - histochemistry by Paul Lacy in Andrew Cudworth and John Insulin - dependent diabetes associated
1959 [48] . Glucagon was similarly localized to the α - cells in 1962 Woodrow (England, 1975) with specifi c HLA antigens
by John Baum and colleagues [49] .
14
--- Page 37 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
(a) (b)
Figure 1.15 Frederick Sanger (b . 1918) and Dorothy Hodgkin, n é e Crowfoot (1910 – 1994). Courtesy of Godfrey Argent Studio, London.
The amino acid sequence of insulin was reported in 1955 by
Frederick Sanger in Cambridge, UK [50] , and the three - dimen-
sional structure of the molecule in 1969 by Dorothy Hodgkin, in
Oxford [51] ; both discoveries were recognized by the award of
Nobel Prizes (Figure 1.15 ). The complete insulin molecule was
synthesized from amino acids by Wang Ying - lai (1908 – 2001) and
colleagues in Shanghai in 1965 [52] . The insulin precursor, proin-
sulin, was described in 1967 by Donald Steiner (b . 1930) in
Chicago [53] . The fi rst bioassay for insulin, based on the hor-
mone ’ s ability to lower blood glucose in the alloxan - diabetic rat,
was reported in 1950 by the Australian Joseph Bornstein (1918 –
1994), working in London with Robin D. Lawrence (see Fig. 1.20 )
[54] . This method was superseded in 1956 by Rosalyn Yalow and
Solomon Berson in the USA, who discovered that insulin was
Figure 1.16 Solomon Berson and Rosalyn Yalow.
antigenic; they exploited the binding of the hormone to anti -
insulin antibodies to develop the fi rst radio - immunoassay [55] .
This assay method revolutionized endocrinology – and indeed,
many areas of physiology and medicine – and was also rewarded glucose transporter (GLUT) proteins by Mueckler and colleagues
with a Nobel Prize (Figure 1.16 ). in the USA [62] .
The sequence of rat insulin genes was described in 1977 by Axel
Ullrich ( b. 1945) and colleagues [56] , and the human sequence Management of d iabetes
by Graham Bell ( b. 1948) and his group in 1980 [57] . The exist- An objective observer surveying clinical diabetes during the half -
ence of insulin receptors was inferred from the insulin - binding century after the discovery of insulin and the “ resurrection ” (a
characteristics of liver - cell membranes by Pierre Freychet ( b. word used by Joslin) of young people with diabetes would have
1935) and colleagues in 1971 [58] , and the receptor protein was been dismayed by what he saw (Table 1.4 ). In particular, young
isolated by Pedro Cuatrecasas ( b. 1936) in the following year [59] . people were dying of complications that had previously been
The gene encoding the insulin receptor was cloned and sequenced assumed to be the preserve of the elderly. Two particularly
in 1985 by two groups [60,61] . In recent years, numerous depressing papers were published in 1947 and 1950. First, Henry
advances have helped to clarify how insulin exerts its biologic Dolger (1909 – 1997) in New York described 20 patients who ful-
actions. Among these was the discovery in 1985 of the fi rst of the fi lled the then - accepted criteria for excellent diabetic control, but
15
--- Page 38 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
Table 1.4 Selected milestones in the management of diabetes.
Lifestyle modifi cation
Li Hsuan (China, 7th century) A void wine, sex and salty cereals
Thomas Willis (England, 17th century) Food restriction
John Rollo (England, 1797) Animal diet
Apollinaire Bouchardat (France, 1875) Food restriction and increased exercise
Carl von Noorden (Germany, 1903) “ Oatmeal ” cure
Frederick Allen (USA, 1913) Starvation diet for early - onset diabetes
Karl Petr é n (Sweden, 1915) High - fat, low - carbohydrate diet
Insulin treatment
Georg Zuelzer (Germany, 1907) and Nicolas Paulesco (Romania, 1921) Isolated pancreatic extracts with hypoglycemic activity
Frederick Banting, Charles Best, J.J.R. Macleod, and James Collip Isolation and fi rst clinical use of insulin
(Canada, 1922 – 1923)
Hans Christian Hagedorn (Denmark, 1936) Protamine insulin, the fi rst long - acting insulin
David Goeddel (USA, 1979) Synthetic human - sequence insulin produced by recombinant DNA technology
John Pickup (London, 1978) D escribed continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
John Ireland (Scotland, 1981) Invented pen injection device
Oral hypoglycemic agents
Avicenna (Arabia, 10th century) Recommended lupin, fenugreek and zedoary seeds
Willhelm Ebstein (Germany, 1876) Recommended sodium salicylate
E. Frank (Germany, 1926) B iguanide derivative (Synthalin) introduced, but withdrawn because of toxicity
Celestino Ruiz (Argentina, 1930) Noted hypoglycemic action of some sulfonamides
Auguste Loubati è res (France, 1942) Discovered hypoglycemic action of prototype sulfonylurea
H. Franke and J. Fuchs (Germany, 1955) Carbutamide introduced
G. Ungar (USA, 1957) Phenformin introduced
Diabetic monitoring and treatment targets
University Group Diabetes Program (USA, 1969) F irst randomized trial in diabetes
Peter S ö nksen and Robert Tattersall (1978) I ntroduction of home blood glucose monitoring
R. Fl ü ckiger and K.H. Winterhalter (Germany, 1975) Showed that HbA was glycated hemoglobin
1c
World Health Organization (1991) S t Vincent Declaration identifi ed targets for diabetes care
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (USA, 1993) P roved that improved glycemic control prevents and slows progression of
microvascular complication in type 1 diabetes
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UK, 1998) P roved that improved glycemic and blood - pressure control improve microvascular and
macrovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes
Management of complications
Gerd Meyer - Schwickerath (Germany, 1964) U se of xenon arc lamp to treat diabetic retinopathy
University of Minnesota Team (USA, 1966) First combined kidney – pancreas transplants
Carl - Erik Mogensen and Hans - Henrik Parving (Denmark, 1980s) S trict blood pressure controls slows progression of diabetic neuropathy
who all developed severe retinopathy after 6 – 22 years [63] ; These and other studies raised questions about whether lower-
among these was the fi rst patient ever to receive insulin at Mount ing blood glucose levels to normal could prevent diabetic com-
Sinai Hospital, New York, who also had heavy albuminuria and plications or reverse them once they had appeared. The hypothesis
hypertension by the age of 32. Second, Ruth Reuting reported a remained untestable for four more decades, until the means to
cohort of 50 young patients originally identifi ed in 1929 [64] . By achieve tight glycemic control and measure it had been devised.
1949, one - third had died (mostly from cardiovascular and renal
disease) at an average age of 25 years, after only 18 years of dia- Insulin
betes, and the survivors showed “ ominous signs of hypertension, For the fi rst decade after its discovery, insulin was available only
azotemia and proteinuria in signifi cant numbers. ” This had in its soluble (regular) formulation, whose short - action profi le
occurred despite the introduction of more versatile insulin prepa- required multiple daily injections. The fi rst delayed - action prepa-
rations (see below); the situation was so hopeless that it inaugu- ration, protamine insulinate, was introduced in 1936 by Hans
rated 20 years of treatment with “ heroic ” measures such as Christian Hagedorn in Denmark (Figure 1.17 ) [65] . This was
adrenalectomy and hypophysectomy. followed by protamine zinc insulin later the same year, then
16
--- Page 39 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
insulin that can be given without injection. The fi rst inhaled
insulin was marketed in 2006 but withdrawn a year later because
of lack of demand and concerns about safety [69] .
Oral h ypoglycemic a gents
The fi rst orally active glucose - lowering drug, synthalin, a guani-
dine derivative, was developed by Frank and colleagues in Breslau
in 1926 [70] , but had to be withdrawn because of toxicity (a recur-
rent problem for oral hypoglycemic drugs). The sulfonylureas
originated from the work of Auguste Loubati è res (1912 – 1977) in
France during the early 1940s on the glucose - lowering action of a
sulfonamide derivative, 2254RP. Loubati è res made the crucial
observations that proved that these drugs act as insulin secretago-
gues and that they were effective in intact, but not in pancreatec-
tomized, animals [71] . In 1955 carbutamide was the fi rst
sulfonylurea to enter clinical practice and tolbutamide followed
in 1957. Phenformin, the fi rst biguanide, was introduced in 1959
following research into the metabolic effects of guanidine deriva-
Figure 1.17 Hans Christian Hagedorn (1888 – 1971) from the Hagedorn Medal.
tives which had built on Frank ’ s initial studies [72] . Metformin
Courtesy of C. Binder, Steno Institute, Hvidovre, Denmark.
appeared on the European market in 1960 but was not marketed
in the USA until 1994. Troglitazone, the fi rst of a new class of
globin insulin in 1939, NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn, or antidiabetic drugs, the glitazones, was also marketed in 1994 but
isophane) in 1946, and the lente series in 1952. Long - acting insu- withdrawn because of liver damage. It was followed by rosiglita-
lins were welcomed by diabetes specialists and patients, but their zone and pioglitazone. Another new class of drugs, acting on the
use as a single daily injection probably produced worse glycemic incretin system, were introduced in 2005. These are either gluca-
control than three or four injections of soluble insulin. Indeed, gon - like peptide 1 (GLP - 1) agonists (such as exenatide) or inhibi-
delayed - action preparations were initially condemned by some tors of the enzyme dipeptidylpeptidase - 4 (DPP - 4) which breaks
diabetes specialists, such as Russell Wilder of the Mayo Clinic, down GLP - 1 (gliptins).
because the patient could slip without apparent warning into Tolbutamide, phenformin and insulin were compared in the
hypoglycemia. treatment of maturity - onset diabetes in the fi rst randomized con-
The number and variety of insulin preparations proliferated, trolled trial, the University Group Diabetes Program [ 73– 7 5].
but the main advances were in methods to produce highly puri- This much - criticized study concluded that the death rate was
fi ed preparations from porcine or bovine pancreas, which higher for both oral agents than for placebo, and that insulin
remained the source for therapeutic insulin until the early 1980s. (whether given in a fi xed or variable dose) was no better than
Insulin was the fi rst therapeutic protein to be produced by placebo [75] . These fi ndings were interpreted by some as suggest-
recombinant DNA technology, initially by David Goeddel ( b. ing that treatment of maturity - onset diabetes was a waste of time
1951), who expressed synthetic genes encoding the A - and – a myth that was only laid fi nally to rest by the UK Prospective
B - chains separately in E scherichia coli and then combined these Diabetes Study.
chemically to produce human - sequence insulin [66] . From there,
genetic engineering has been used to produce “ designer ” insulins Glucose c ontrol and t reatment t argets
such as the fast - acting insulin analogs lispro and aspart and the D uring the 1920s, opinion leaders advocated normalizing blood
“ peakless ” basal insulins such as glargine and detemir. How much glucose in young patients with diabetes, the rationale being to
these will improve glycemic control in the generality of people “ rest ” the pancreas, in the hope that it might regenerate. The only
with diabetes is debatable; weekend golfers do not become cham- way of monitoring diabetic control was by testing the urine for
pions when given expensive clubs! glucose, and attempts to keep the urine free from sugar inevitably
M ost people with diabetes still inject insulin subcutaneously. resulted in severe hypoglycemia and often psychologic damage.
From the patient ’ s viewpoint, major milestones were the replace- This led to the so- c alled “ f ree diet” movement – linked particu-
ment of glass and steel syringes by disposable plastic syringes with larly with Adolf Lichtenstein (Stockholm) and Edward Tolstoi
fi ne - gauge needles, and then by “ pen ” injection devices invented (New York) – which encouraged patients to eat whatever they
by John Ireland (1933 – 1988) in Glasgow, Scotland, in 1981 [67] . liked and not to worry about glycosuria, however heavy. Tolstoi ’ s
Portable insulin infusion pumps were developed by John Pickup view [76] was that a life saved by insulin should be worth living,
( b. 1947) and colleagues in London during the late 1970s [68] , and that patients should be able to forget that they had diabetes
and have become progressively smaller and more sophisticated. after each morning ’ s injection; it seems likely that many physi-
Patients and manufacturers hope that there will eventually be an cians followed this policy for the next 40 years.
17
--- Page 40 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
Adult physicians were similarly ambivalent about the impor-
tance of good glycemic control. Only one - third of diabetes physi-
cians questioned in England in 1953 thought that normoglycemia
would prevent diabetic complications, and only one - half advised
urine testing at home [77] .
Practical monitoring of diabetic control became feasible in the
late 1970s with the introduction into clinical practice of test strips
for measuring blood glucose in a fi ngerprick sample and the
demonstration that ordinary patients could use them at home
[78,79] . The discovery of hemoglobin A by Samuel Rahbar ( b .
1c
1929) paved the way for glycated hemoglobin (HbA ) assays
1c
which gave an objective measure of overall glucose control [ 80].
These methods in turn made possible the North American
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial, which in 1993 fi nally
established that good control prevents and delays the progression
of microvascular complications in type 1 diabetes [ 81]. For type
2 diabetes, the importance of good glycemic control was defi ni-
tively proved by another landmark study, the UK Prospective
Diabetes Study (UKPDS), masterminded in Oxford, UK, by
Robert Turner (Figure 1.18 ). The UKPDS reported in 1998, and
not only showed a benefi cial effect of improved glycemic control
on microvascular complications [82] , but also established the
importance of treating hypertension [83] . By the late 1990s it was
clear that reducing glucose levels, high blood pressure or choles-
terol separately would reduce the frequency of heart disease and
death and it was natural to wonder whether tackling them simul-
taneously (multiple risk factor intervention) would be even
better. The Steno 2 study, which began in Denmark in 1992,
enrolled patients with type 2 diabetes with microalbuminuria and
after 13 years of follow - up showed that multiple risk factor inter-
vention reduced the risk of death by 20% and the risk of develop-
ing nephropathy, retinopathy and neuropathy by 50% [84] . Figure 1.18 Robert Turner (1939 – 1999), instigator of the UKPDS, the fi rst
study to show that good control of blood glucose and blood pressure was
benefi cial in type 2 diabetes. Courtesy of the British Diabetic Association.
Diabetic c omplications
Apart from the general benefi ts of controlling blood glucose,
some specifi c treatments have emerged for certain chronic com-
plications. Well - conducted clinical trials during the late 1970s Diabetic k etoacidosis
showed the effectiveness of laser photocoagulation in preventing The introduction of insulin was only one aspect of the manage-
visual loss from both maculopathy and proliferative retinopathy ment of this acute and previously fatal complication of diabetes.
[85] . This technique was derived from the xenon arc lamp origi- Of the fi rst 33 cases treated by Joslin and his colleagues between
nally described in the late 1950s by Gerd Meyer - Schwickerath January 1, 1923 and April 1, 1925, 31 survived – an excellent
(1921– 9 2) of Essen, Germany [ 86]. outcome, even by modern standards, which Joslin [89] attributed
T he importance of blood pressure control in preventing the to: “ Promptly applied medical care, rest in bed, special nursing
progression of nephropathy is now fully recognized, and angi- attendance, warmth, evacuation of the bowels by enema, the
otensin - converting enzyme inhibitors may be particularly introduction of liquids into the body, lavage of the stomach,
benefi cial; that blood pressure control slowed the progression of cardiac stimulants, and above all the exclusion of alkalis. ”
nephropathy was shown in studies by Carl - Erik Mogensen Sadly, other centers did not pay so much attention to detail. In
( b. 1938) and Hans - Henrik Parving (b . 1943) published in the 1933, the death rate from ketoacidosis in Boston was only 5%,
early 1980s [87] . The measurement of low albumin concentra- but elsewhere in North America and Europe it averaged 30% and
tions in urine (microalbuminuria), now used throughout the could be as high as 75%. An important advance in management
world to screen for and monitor the course of diabetic neph- was the acceptance of relatively low - dose insulin replacement,
ropathy, is derived from a radioimmunoassay developed in 1969 following the example of Ruth Menzel and colleagues in
by Harry Keen and Costas Chlouverakis, at Guy ’ s Hospital in Karlsburg, Germany [90] . This broke with the tradition of high -
London [88] . dose regimens such as that proposed by Howard Root in the USA,
18
--- Page 41 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
which had recommended an average of 1200 U insulin during the provided by an experienced and dedicated team consisting of a
fi rst 24 hours of treatment [91] . Another step forward was the physician, obstetrician and pediatrician [94] . Pedersen ’ s target of
recognition by Jacob Holler in 1946 of the danger of hypokalemia a fetal mortality rate of 6% was not achieved in most European
[92] . Holler ’ s observation helped to establish the need for moni- or US units until the 1980s.
toring plasma potassium levels, which became feasible with the
introduction of the fl ame photometer, and replacing potassium Delivery of c are for p eople with d iabetes
accordingly. From the earliest days of insulin injection and urine testing, it
was apparent that people with diabetes needed knowledge and
D iabetic p r egnancy practical skills to manage their disease effectively. Lip- s ervice was
As late as 1950, the outcome of pregnancy in women with diabe- often paid to the importance of diabetes education, but most
tes was still very poor in most units, with perinatal fetal losses of patients were badly informed. In 1952, Samuel Beaser (1910 –
45 – 65%, some 10 times higher than in the general population. 2005) questioned 128 patients attending the Boston Diabetes
Exceptions to this depressing rule were the units run by Priscilla Fair, and found that “ all were distinctly defi cient in knowledge of
White at the Joslin Clinic in Boston, who had published excellent their disease ” [95] ; he felt that responsibility lay with both doctors
results as early as 1935 [93] , and by J ø rgen Pedersen in and administrators. Further studies during the 1960s by Donnell
Copenhagen (Figure 1.19 ). Pedersen identifi ed the common Etzwiler (1927 – 2003) in Minneapolis showed that many doctors
features underpinning success as good diabetic control and care and nurses were also ignorant about managing diabetes. Since the
(a) (b)
Figure 1.19 J ø rgen Pedersen (1914 – 1978) and Ivo Drury (1905– 1 988), pioneers, with Priscilla White (1900 – 1989), in the management of pregnancy in women with
type 1 diabetes. Courtesy of Dr. Carl Erik Mogensen and the Royal College of Physicians of Ireland.
19
--- Page 42 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
(a) (b)
Figure 1.20 Ernesto Roma (1887 – 1978) and (right) Robin D. Lawrence (1892– 1968). Photograph of Dr. Roma by courtesy of Manuel Machado S á Marques and the
Associa ç ã o Protectura das Diab é ticos de Portugal.
1980s, diabetes specialist nurses and nurse educators have been jointly in 1990 by the EASD and the World Health Organization
appointed in increasingly large numbers – thus fulfi lling a sug- [96] .
gestion originally made by Joslin in 1916.
National and international diabetes associations have also
References
played an important part by supporting scientifi c and clinical
research, providing practical and moral help for patients, and
1 Willis T . Pharmaceutice Rationalis; sive, Diatriba de Medicamentorum
lobbying governments on patients ’ behalf. The fi rst of these
Operationibus in Humano Corpore [2 parts in 1 vol]. Oxford :
organizations was the Portuguese Association for the Protection
Sheldonian Theatre , 1674 .
of Poor Diabetics, founded in 1926 by Ernesto Roma of Lisbon
2 Dobson M . Experiments and observations on the urine in diabetes .
after an inspiring visit to Joslin ’ s clinic in Boston (Figure 1.20 ).
Med Obs Inq 1776 ; 5 : 298 – 316 .
The Association ’ s aim was to provide free insulin and education
3 Rollo J . A n Account of Two Cases of the Diabetes Mellitus, With
for people with diabetes and their families. In the UK, the Diabetic Remarks as They Arose During the Progress of the Cure . London : C.
Association (later the British Diabetic Association, and now Dilly , 1797 . [A 2nd edition with more cases was published in 1798
Diabetes UK) was established in 1934 by Robin Lawrence of and a 3rd edition in 1806.]
King ’ s College Hospital, London, helped by the novelist H.G. 4 Chevreul ME . Note sur le sucre du diab è te . A nn Chim (Paris) 1815 ;
Wells (Figure 1.20 ). Similar organizations were later founded in 95 : 319 – 320 .
France (1938), the USA (1940) and Belgium (1942), and now 5 Olmsted JMD . Claude Bernard, 1813 – 79 . D iabetes 1953 ; 2 : 162 – 164 .
6 Bernard C . Chiens rendus diab é tiques . C R Seances Soc Biol (Paris)
exist in most countries.
1850 ; 1 : 60 .
On a wider scale, the International Diabetes Foundation
7 Macleod JJR . Recent work on the pathologic physiology of glycosuria .
was established in 1950 and the European Association for the
JAMA 1914 ; 1 13 : 1226 – 1235 .
Study of Diabetes (EASD) in 1964. These organizations are
8 Von Mering J , Minkowski O . Diabetes mellitus nach Pank rea-
devoted to the practice of diabetes care as well as the basic and
sextirpation . Arch Exp Pathol Pharmacol Leipzig 1890 ; 2 6 : 371 – 387 .
clinical science of the disease, and have been valuable in coordi- 9 Tattersall RB . Charles - É douard Brown - S é quard: double hyphenated
nating treatment targets and strategies at international level; neurologist and forgotten father of endocrinology . D iabet Med 1994 ;
an important example was the St. Vincent Declaration, issued 11 : 728 – 731 .
20
--- Page 43 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
10 Laguesse GE . Sur la formation des î lots de Langerhans dans le pan- 36 Feutren G , Papoz L , Assan R , Vialettes B , Karsenty G , Vexiau P , e t al .
cr é as . C R S é ances Mem Soc Biol 1893 ; 4 5 : 819 – 820 . Cyclosporin increases the rate and length of remissions in insulin -
11 Langerhans P . Beitr ä ge zur mikroskopischen Anatomie der dependent diabetes of recent onset: results of a multicentre double -
Bauchspeicheldr ü se [dissertation]. Berlin : Gustave Lange , 1869 . blind trial . L ancet 1986 ; 2 : 119 – 124 .
12 De Meyer J . Sur la signifi cation physiologique de la s é cr é tion interne 37 Gale EA , Bingley PJ , Emmett CL , Collier T , European Nicotinamide
du pancr é as . Z entralbl Physiol 1904 ; 18 :S 826 . Diabetes Intervention Trial (ENDIT) Group. E uropean Nicotinamide
13 Saundby R . The Bradshaw Lecture on the morbid anatomy of diabetes Diabetes Intervention Trial (ENDIT): a randomised controlled trial
mellitus . Lancet 1890 ; i i : 381 – 386 . of intervention before the onset of type 1 diabetes . Lancet 2004 ;
14 Jaeger E . Jaeger ’ s Atlas of Diseases of the Ocular Fundus: with New 363 : 925 – 931 .
Descriptions, Revisions, and Additions , tr. and ed. Albert DM. 38 Diabetes Prevention Trial – Type 1 Diabetes Study Group . Effects of
[Translation of Ophthalmoskopischer Hand- A tlas, rev. ed. Salzmann insulin in relatives of patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus . N Engl J
M., Leipzig, 1890; 1st edn. 1869.] Philadelphia : Saunders , 1972 . Med 2002 ; 346 : 1685 – 1691 .
15 Nettleship E . Haemorrhagic retinitis in a patient with diabetes, vari- 39 Ryan EA , Paty BW , Senior PA , Bigam D , Alfadhli E , Kneteman NM ,
cose swellings on a retinal vein in the right eye. Trans Opthalmol Soc et al . Five - year follow - up after clinical islet transplantation . Diabetes
UK 1888 ; 8 : 161 . 2005 ; 5 4 : 2060 – 2069 .
16 Hirschberg J . Ü ber diabetische Netzhautentz ü ndung . Dtsch Med 40 Wagener HF , Dry TJS , Wilder RM . Retinitis in diabetes . N Engl J Med
Wochenschr 1890 ; 1 6 : 1181 . 1934 ; 2 11 : 1131 – 1137 .
17 Pavy FW . Introductory address to the discussion on the clinical aspect 41 Kimmelstiel P , Wilson C . Intercapillary lesions in the glomeruli of the
of glycosuria . L ancet 1885 ; i i : 1085 – 1087 . kidney . Am J Pathol 1936 ; 12 : 83 – 97 .
18 Pavy FW . On diabetic neuritis . Lancet 1904 ; i i : 17 – 19 . 42 Bloodworth JMB . A re - evaluation of diabetic glomerulosclerosis 50
19 Griesinger W . Studien ü ber Diabetes . A rch Physiol Heilkd 1859 ; years after the discovery of insulin . Hum Pathol 1978 ; 9 : 439 – 453 .
3 : 1 – 75 . 43 Lundb æ k K . Long - Term Diabetes: the Clinical Picture in Diabetes
20 Lanceraux E . Le diab è te maigre: ses symptomes, son é volution, son Mellitus of 15 – 25 Years ’ Duration with a Follow Up of a Regional Series
pronostic et son traitement . Union M é d Paris 1880 ; 2 0 : 205 – 211 . of Cases . London : Lange, Maxwell and Springer , 1953 .
21 Joslin EP . Present - day treatment and prognosis in diabetes . A m J Med 44 Lundb æ k K . Diabetic angiopathy: a specifi c vascular disease . L ancet
Sci 1915 ; 150 : 485 – 496 . 1954 ; i : 377 – 379 .
22 Joslin EP . T he Treatment of Diabetes Mellitus: with Observations Based 45 Kinoshita JH . Mechanisms initiating cataract formation . Invest
upon One Thousand Cases . Philadelphia : Lea & Febiger , 1916 . Ophthalmol 1974 ; 1 3 : 713 – 724 .
23 Zuelzer GL . Experimentelle Untersuchungen ü ber den Diabetes . 46 Lane MA . The cytological characters of the areas of Langerhans . Am
Berlin Klin Wochenschr 1907 ; 4 4 : 474 – 475 . J Anat 1907 ; 7 : 409 – 421 .
24 Richards DW . The effect of pancreas extract on depancreatized 47 Young FG . Permanent experimental diabetes produced by pituitary
dogs: Ernest L. Scott ’ s thesis of 1911 . Perspect Biol Med 1966 ; 10 : (anterior lobe) injections . Lancet 1937 ; i i : 372 – 374 .
84 – 95 . 4 8 L acy P E. E lectron microscopic and fl uorescent antibody studies on
25 Paulesco NC . Recherche sur le r ô le du pancr é as dans l ’ assimilation islets of Langerhans . Exp Cell Res 1959 ; 7 : 296 – 308 .
nutritive . Arch Int Physiol 1921 ; 17 : 85 – 109 . 49 Baum J , Simmons BE , Unger RH , Madison LL . Localization of glu-
26 Bliss M . T he Discovery of Insulin . Chicago : University of Chicago cagon in the A - cells in the pancreatic islet by immunofl uorescence .
Press , 1982 . Diabetes 1962 ; 1 1 : 371 – 378 .
27 Banting FG , Best CH , Collip JB , Campbell WR , Fletcher AA . 50 Brown H , Sanger F , Kitai R . The structure of pig and sheep insulin .
Pancreatic extracts in the treatment of diabetes mellitus: preliminary Biochem J 1955 ; 6 0 : 556 – 565 .
report . C an Med Assoc J 1922 ; 1 2 : 141 – 146 . 51 Adams MJ , Blundell TL , Dodson EJ , Hodgkin DC . Structure of 2 zinc
28 Hetenyi G . The day after: how insulin was received by the medical insulin crystals. Nature 1969 ; 224 : 491 – 495 .
profession . Perspect Biol Med 1995 ; 3 8 : 396 – 405 . 52 Kung K , Huang W , et al. Total synthesis of crystalline insulin . Sci
29 Falta W . D ie Zuckerkrankheit . Berlin : Urban und Schwarzenberg , Sinica 1966 ; 1 5 : 544 – 561 .
1936 . 53 Steiner DF , Oyer PE . The biosynthesis of insulin and probable precur-
30 Himsworth HP . Diabetes mellitus: its differentiation into insulinsen- sor of insulin by a human islet cell adenoma . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S
sitive and insulin - insensitive types . L ancet 1936 ; i : 127 – 30 . A 1967 ; 57 : 473 – 480 .
31 DeFronzo RA , Tobin JD , Andres R . Glucose clamp technique: a 54 Bornstein J , Lawrence RD . Two types of diabetes, with and without
method for quantifying insulin secretion and resistance . Am J Physiol available plasma insulin . B r Med J 1951 ; i : 732 – 735 .
1979 ; 2 37 :E 214 – E 223 . 55 Yalow RS , Berson SA . Assay of plasma insulin in human subjects by
32 Tattersall RB . Mild familial diabetes with dominant inheritance . Q J immunological methods . Nature 1958 ; 184 : 1648 – 1649 .
Med 1974 ; 4 3 : 339 – 357 . 56 Ullrich A , Shrine J , Chirgwin J , Pictet R , Tischer E , Rutter WJ , e t al.
33 Opie EL . On the relation of chronic interstitial pancreatitis to the Rat insulin genes: construction of plasmids containing the coding
islands of Langerhans and to diabetes mellitus . J Exp Med 1901 ; sequences . S cience 1977 ; 196 : 1313 – 1319 .
5 : 393 – 397 . 57 Bell GI , Pictet RL , Rutter WJ , Cordell B , Tischer E , Goodman HM .
34 Gepts W . Pathologic anatomy of the pancreas in juvenile diabetes . Sequence of the human insulin gene . N ature 1980 ; 284 : 26 – 32 .
Diabetes 1965 ; 1 4 : 619 – 633 . 58 Freychet P , Roth J , Neville DM Jr . Insulin receptors in the liver: spe-
35 Bottazzo GF , Florin - Christensen A , Doniach D . Islet - cell antibodies cifi c binding of [ 125 I] insulin of the plasma membrane and its relation
in diabetes mellitus with autoimmune polyendocrine defi ciencies . to insulin bioactivity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1971 ; 6 8 : 1833 –
Lancet 1974 ; i i : 1279 – 1283 . 1837 .
21
--- Page 44 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
59 Cuatrecasas P . Affi nity chromatography and purifi cation of the 82 UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group . Intensive blood -
insulin receptor of liver cell membrane . P roc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1972 ; glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with con-
62 : 1277 – 1281 . ventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2
60 Ullrich A , Bell JR , Chen EY , Herrera R , Petruzzelli LM , Dull TJ , e t al. diabetes (UKPDS 33) . L ancet 1998 ; 3 52 : 837 – 853 .
Human insulin receptor and its relationship to the tyrosine kinase 83 UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group . Tight blood pres-
family of oncogenes . N ature 1985 ; 3 13 : 756 – 761 . sure control and risk of macrovascular and microvascular complica-
61 Ebina Y , Ellis L , Jarnagin K , Edery M , Graf L , Clauser E , et al. The tions in type 2 diabetes: UKPDS 38 . B r Med J 1998 ; 3 17 : 703 – 713 .
human insulin receptor cDNA: the structural basis for hormone - 84 Gaede P , Vedel P , Larsen N , Jensen GV , Parving HH , Pedersen O .
activated transmembrane signalling . Cell 1985 ; 40 : 747 – 758 . Multifactorial intervention and cardiovascular disease in type 2 dia-
62 Mueckler M , Caruso C , Baldwin SA , Panico M , Blench I , Morris HR , betes . N Engl J Med 2003 ; 3 48 : 383 – 393 .
et al. Sequence and structure of a human glucose transporter . Science 85 Diabetic Retinopathy Research Group . Photocoagulation treatment
1985 ; 229 : 941 – 945 . of proliferative diabetic retinopathy. The second report of Diabetic
63 Dolger H . Clinical evaluation of vascular damage in diabetes mellitus . Retinopathy Study Findings . O phthalmology 1978 ; 8 5 : 82 – 106 .
JAMA 1947 ; 134 : 1289 – 1291 . 86 Meyer - Schwickerath G . L ight Coagulation (Drance SM, trans). St
64 Reuting RE . Progress notes on fi fty diabetic patients followed 25 or Louis : Mosby , 1960 .
more years . A rch Intern Med 1950 ; 8 6 : 891 – 897 . 87 Mogensen CE . Long - term antihypertensive treatment inhibiting pro-
65 Deckert T . H.C. Hagedorn and Danish Insulin . Herning, Denmark : gression of diabetic nephropathy . Br Med J 1982 ; 2 85 : 685 – 688 .
Kristensen , 2000 . 88 Keen H , Chlouverakis C . An immunoassay for urinary albumin at low
66 Goeddel DV , Kleid DG , Bolivar F . E xpression in Escherichia coli of concentrations . L ancet 1963 ; i i : 913 – 916 .
chemically synthesized genes from human insulin . P roc Natl Acad Sci 89 Joslin EP , Root HF , White P . Diabetic coma and its treatment . Med
U S A 1979 ; 76 : 106 – 110 . Clin North Am 1925 ; 8 : 1873 – 1919 .
67 Paton JS , Wilson M , Ireland JT , Reith SBM . Convenient pocket 90 Menzel R , Zander E , Jutzi E . Treatment of diabetic coma with low -
insulin syringe . L ancet 1981 ; i : 189 – 190 . dose injections of insulin . Endokrinologie 1976 ; 6 7 : 230 – 239 .
68 Pickup JC , Keen H , Parsons JA , Alberti KGMM . Continuous subcu- 91 Root HF . The use of insulin and the abuse of glucose in treatment of
taneous insulin infusion: an approach to achieving normoglycaemia . diabetic coma . JAMA 1945 ; 1 27 : 557 – 563 .
Br Med J 1978 ; i : 204 – 207 . 92 Holler JW . Potassium defi ciency occurring during the treatment of
69 Mathieu C , Gale EAM . Inhaled insulin: gone with the wind? diabetic acidosis. JAMA 1946 ; 1 31 : 1186 – 1188 .
Diabetologia 2008 ; 5 1 : 1 – 5 . 9 3 W hite P . P regnancy complicating diabetes. S urg Gynecol Obstet 1935 ;
70 Frank E , Nothmann M , Wagner A . Ü ber synthetisch dargestellte 61 : 324 – 332 .
K ö rper mit insulinartiger Wirkung auf den normalen und den dia- 9 4 P edersen J , B randstrup E . F oetal mortality in pregnant diabetics: strict
betischen Organismus . Klin Wochenschr 1926 ; 2100 – 2107 . control of diabetes with conservative obstetric management . L ancet
71 Loubati è res A . Th è se Doctorat Sciences Naturelles , no. 86. Montpellier, 1956 ; i : 607 – 610 .
1946. M ontpellier: C ausse, Graille et Castelnau, 1 956. 9 5 B easer S B. T eaching the diabetic patient. Diabetes 1956 ; 5 : 146 – 149 .
72 Tyberghein JM , Williams RH . Metabolic effects of phenylethyldigua- 9 6 A non. D iabetes care and research in Europe: the Saint Vincent
nide, a new hypoglycemic compound (23386) . Proc Soc Exp Med Biol Declaration . D iabet Med 1990 ; 7 : 360 .
1957 ; 96 : 29 – 32 .
73 Tattersall RB . The quest for normoglycaemia: a historical perspective .
Further r eading
Diabet Med 1994 ; 1 1 : 618 – 635 .
74 Marks HM . The Progress of Experiment: Science and Therapeutic
Reform in the United States . New York : Cambridge University Press , Bliss M . T he Discovery of Insulin . Toronto : McClelland and Stewart , 1982;
1997 : 197 – 228 . and Edinburgh: Paul Harris Publishing, 1983 .
75 University Group Diabetes Program . A study of the effects of hypogly- Deckert , T . H C Hagedorn and Danish Insulin . Copenhagen : Poul
cemic agents on vascular complications in patients with adult onset Kristensen , 2000 .
diabetes . D iabetes 1970 ; 1 9 (Suppl.): 789 – 830 . Feudtner C . B itter Sweet, Diabetes, Insulin and the Transformation of
76 Tolstoi E . The objective of modern diabetic care . Psychosom Med Illness . Chapel Hill and London : University of North Carolina Press ,
1948 ; 10 : 291 – 294 . 2003 .
77 Walker GF . Refl ections on diabetes mellitus: answers to a question- Feudtner C , Gabbe S . Diabetes and pregnancy: four motifs of modern
naire . L ancet 1953 ; i i : 1329 – 1332 . medical history . Clin Obstet Gynecol 2000 ; 43 : 4 – 16 .
78 Sonksen P , Judd S , Lowy C . Home monitoring of blood glucose: Goldner MG . Historical review of oral substitutes for insulin . Diabetes
method for improving diabetic control . Lancet 1978 ; 1 : 729 – 732 . 1957 ; 6 : 259 – 262 .
79 Walford S , Gale EAM , Allison SP , Tattersall RB . Self - monitoring of Ionescu - Tirgoviste C . T he Rediscovery of Insulin . Bucharest : Geneze , 1996 .
blood glucose: improvement of diabetic control . Lancet 1978 ; Loubati è res A . The hypoglycaemic sulphonamides: history and develop-
1 : 732 – 735 . ment of the problem from 1942 to 1955 . A nn N Y Acad Sci 1957 ;
80 Rahbar S . An abnormal hemoglobin in the red cells of diabetics . Clin 71 : 4 – 28 .
Chim Acta 1968 ; 22 : 296 – 298 . Medvei VC . A History of Endocrinology. L ancaster: M TP Press, 1 982.
8 1 D iabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. T he effect Tattersall R . Diabetes: t he biography , Oxford : Oxford University Press ,
of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progres- 2009 .
sion of long - term complications in insulin - dependent diabetes mel- von Engelhardt , D . D iabetes: its Medical and Cultural History. B erlin:
litus . N Engl J Med 1993 ; 3 29 : 977 – 986 . Springer , 1989 .
22
--- Page 45 ---
History of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 1
Websites Archives
General h istory of d iabetes The notebooks and personal papers of the discoverers of insulin are
http://pr15.mphy.lu.se/Diahistory1.html preserved at the Thomas Fisher Rare Book Library, University of
http://www.diabetes/living.com/basics/histdev.htm Toronto, Canada.
Discovery of i nsulin
Discovery of Insulin website: http://web.idirect.com/ ∼ discover
Banting Digital Library: http://www.Newtecumseth.library.on.ca.
banting/main.html
Nobel Prize Website: http://www.nobel.se/medicine/laureates/1923
23
--- Page 46 ---
2
The Classifi cation and Diagnosis of
Diabetes Mellitus
K. George M.M. Alberti
E ndocrinology and Metabolism, Imperial College St Mary ’ s Campus, London, UK
Key points
(cid:129) The classifi cation of diabetes mellitus is based on four main categories: individuals two abnormal values are required and an oral glucose
Type 1, Type 2, other specifi c types, and gestational diabetes mellitus tolerance test may be needed
(cid:129) Impaired glucose tolerance and impaired fasting glycemia are high- r isk (cid:129) The diagnosis of diabetes can not be excluded by measuring fasting
states collectively termed “ intermediate hyperglycemia ” plasma glucose alone
(cid:129) Type 2 diabetes is a diagnosis by exclusion and as more specifi c causes (cid:129) HbA has major advantages over glucose testing in terms of
1c
are found these will move out of the type two category into other convenience and lack of variability, although it is not adequately quality
specifi c types assured or standardized in many places, and is costly. Nonetheless, it is
(cid:129) Measurement of glucose continues to be the mainstay of diagnosis. In already recommended in some countries as an alternative diagnostic
the symptomatic person a single abnormal value, either casual or test. This is likely to become more widespread
fasting, is often enough to confi rm the diagnosis. In asymptomatic
was generally stated that the latter was just a milder form of the
Introduction disease. Diagnosis now depended on glucose measurement with
some using glucose tolerance tests. There were no standard cri-
Diabetes mellitus is a disease of antiquity (see Chapter 1 ). A treat- teria for these initially, although glucose levels were clearly above
ment was described in the Ebers papyrus and as long ago as 600 b c normal. Diagnosis usually occurred after clinical development of
two main types were distinguished. Perhaps the most famous the disease with the combination of symptoms with raised glucose
description was by Arateus the Cappadocian who talked of the in the blood or glycosuria being diagnostic, together with ketonu-
melting down of fl esh into urine and of the end being speedy. ria in the juvenile - onset form.
Over the ensuing centuries sporadic descriptions were noted, with A further breakthrough occurred with the work of Himsworth
Maimonides in Egypt pointing out its relative rarity. It was attrib- in 1936. Himsworth ’ s work showed that people with diabetes
uted to a salt - losing state although the sweetness of the urine had could be divided into insulin - resistant and insulin - sensitive types,
long been known. Undoubtedly, virtually all of these accounts with the former much more common in those with the maturity -
referred to type 1 (T1DM) or late type 2 diabetes (T2DM). o nset variety [ 1]. The next milestone was the development of the
Diabetes was better recognized in the 17th and 18th centuries, radioimmunoassay for insulin which allowed the unequivocal
with the association with obesity noted in some cases. The demonstration of insulin defi ciency, or indeed absence, in those
obvious breakthrough came in the 17th century with the demon- with juvenile - onset diabetes while levels were apparently normal
stration of excess glucose in the urine and later also in blood. or raised in those with maturity - onset diabetes.
The presence of excess ketones was shown in the 19th century. At that time, diabetes was still considered to be a relatively
A clear description of the two main types of diabetes appeared at uncommon disorder occurring predominantly in Europids. The
the end of the 19th century, with the distinction being made World Health Organization (WHO) began to take note and held
between that occurring in young people with a short time course its fi rst Expert Committee meeting in 1964 [2] . The real break-
before ketoacidosis supervened, and that found in older people through, however, in terms of diagnosis and classifi cation came
who were obese. Over the next decades these became known as in 1980 with the publication of the second Expert Committee
juvenile - onset diabetes and maturity - onset diabetes, although it report [3] shortly after the report from the National Diabetes Data
Group (NDDG) in the USA in 1979 [4] . These events form the
starting point for the diagnostic criteria and classifi cation used
Textbook of Diabetes, 4th edition. Edited by R. Holt, C. Cockram,
A. Flyvbjerg and B. Goldstein. © 2010 Blackwell Publishing. today.
24
--- Page 47 ---
Classifi cation and Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 2
Table 2.1 Etiologic classifi cation of disorders of glycemia. Adapted from
Defi nitions
World Health Organization [6] .
D iabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder of multiple etiologies. It Type 1 diabetes (β - cell destruction)
is characterized by chronic hyperglycemia together with distur- (cid:129) Autoimmune
bances of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism resulting (cid:129) Idiopathic
from defects of insulin secretion, insulin action or both [6] . The Type 2 diabetes (insulin resistance with insulin hyposecretion)
relative contribution of these varies between different types of Other specifi c types (Table 2.2 )
diabetes. These are associated with the development of the spe- Gestational diabetes (includes former categories of gestational IGT and
cifi c microvascular complications of retinopathy, which can lead gestational diabetes)
to blindness, nephropathy with potential renal failure, and neu-
IGT, impaired glucose tolerance.
ropathy. The latter carries the risk of foot ulcers and amputation
and also autonomic nerve dysfunction. Diabetes is also associated
with an increased risk of macrovascular disease. diabetes mellitus was also introduced in recognition of a different
The characteristic clinical presentation is with thirst, polyuria, phenotype found particularly in Asia and sub - Saharan Africa.
blurring of vision and weight loss. This can lead to ketoacidosis Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) was also introduced as a high
or hyperosmolar non - ketotic coma (see Chapter 19 ). Often, risk class.
symptoms are mild or absent and mild hyperglycemia can persist Based on increasing knowledge, WHO revisited the classifi ca-
for years with tissue damage developing, although the person tion in 1999 [6] as did the American Diabetes Association (ADA)
may be totally asymptomatic. [7] . It was recognized that the terms IDDM and NIDDM, although
superfi cially appealing, were often confusing and unhelpful – as
in patients with insulin - treated T2DM. The new classifi cation
Classifi cation attempted to encompass both etiology and clinical stages of the
disease as well as being useful clinically. This was based on the
There was awareness of different grades of severity of diabetes for suggestion of Kuzuya and Matsuda [8] . This acknowledges that
many centuries; however, the possibility that there were two diabetes may progress through several clinical stages (e.g. from
distinct types only emerged at the beginning of the 20th century. normoglycemia to ketoacidosis) while having a single etiologic
Even then there was no real clue to distinct etiologies. In the process such as autoimmune attack on the β - cells. Similarly, it is
1930s, Himsworth suggested that there were two phenotypes. The possible that someone with T2DM can move from insulin require-
fi rst real attempt to classify diabetes came with the fi rst WHO ment to no pharmaceutical intervention through modifi cation of
Expert Committee on Diabetes Mellitus which felt that the only lifestyle. The main classes are T1DM, T2DM, other specifi c types
reliable classifi cation was by age of onset and divided diabetes into and gestational diabetes (Table 2.1 ). It should be noted that
juvenile - onset and maturity - onset disease [2] . There were many T2DM is largely categorization by exclusion. As new causes are
other phenotypes in vogue at that time including brittle, gesta- discovered so they will be included under “ other specifi c types ”
tional, pancreatic, endocrine, insulin -r esistant and iatrogenic as has occurred for maturity - onset diabetes of the young (MODY).
diabetes, but for most cases there was no clear indication of etiol- The classifi cation was revisited by WHO in 2006, but no
ogy. Clarity began to emerge in the 1970s with the discovery of further modifi cation was introduced, and it will be examined
the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genotypes common in juve- again in 2010 when at most minor amendments will be made.
nile - onset diabetes and the discovery of islet call antibodies. This IGT was removed from the formal classifi cation of types of dia-
gave a clear indication that younger patients with diabetes, all of betes – logically, as it is not diabetes – but was retained as a risk
whom required insulin therapy, had an autoimmune disorder. state. Impaired fasting glycemia (IFG) was introduced as another
The beginning of the modern era came with the second WHO risk state. This was particularly important in many countries
Expert Committee [3] which reviewed and modifi ed the revised where glucose tolerance tests are rarely performed in practice
classifi cation published by the National Diabetes Data Group [4] . outside of pregnancy so that IGT was not diagnosed and IFG,
This proposed two main classes of diabetes: insulin - dependent although not strictly equivalent, has been used as an easily
diabetes mellitus (IDDM; type 1) and non - insulin - dependent obtained risk marker.
diabetes (NIDDM; type 2) together with “ o ther types” and ges-
tational diabetes. There were also two risk classes: previous Type 1 d iabetes
abnormality of glucose intolerance (PrevAGT) and potential T1DM is primarily caused by β - cell destruction although some
abnormality of glucose tolerance (PotAGT) which replaced previ- insulin resistance is also present (see Chapter 9 ). After the initial
ous types known as pre - diabetes or potential diabetes. stages, insulin is required for survival. In Europids > 90% show
The 1980 classifi cation was revised further in 1985 [5] and evidence of autoimmunity with anti - glutamine acid decarboxy-
reverted to clinical descriptions with retention of IDDM and lase (anti- G AD), anti- i nsulin and/or islet cell antibodies detect-
NIDDM but omission of type 1 and type 2. Malnutrition - related able. It shows strong association with specifi c alleles at the DQ - A
25
--- Page 48 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
and DQ - B loci of the HLA complex [9] . Not all subjects with the
Table 2.2 Other specifi c types of diabetes. Adapted from World Health
clinical characteristics of T1DM show these associations with
Organization [6] .
autoimmunity although they are ketosis - prone, non - obese and
generally under the age of 30 years. In non - Europid populations, Genetic defects of β - cell function
up to 80% may show no measurable autoantibodies [10] ; these Chromosome 20, HNF4α (MODY 1)
are referred to as having idiopathic T1DM. As with autoimmune Chromosome 7, glucokinase (MODY 2)
diabetes, however, there is clear loss of β - cell function as meas- Chromosome 12, HNF1α (MODY 3)
ured by low or absent C - peptide secretion. Diabetes occurring Chromosome 13, IPF - 1 (MODY 4)
before the age of 6 months is most likely to be monogenic neonatal Mitochondrial DNA 3243 mutation
diabetes rather than autoimmune T1DM (see Chapter 15 ) [11] . Others
In addition to the typically young people with acute - onset Genetic defects in insulin action
T1DM, there is an older group with slower onset disease. They Type A insulin resistance
may present in middle age with apparent T2DM but have evi- Leprechaunism
dence of autoimmunity as assessed by GAD antibody measure- Rabson – Mendenhall syndrome
ments and ultimately become insulin - dependent. This is referred Lipoatrophic diabetes
Others
to as latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA) [12] .
Disease of the endocrine pancreas
Type 2 di abetes
Fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
By far the majority of people with diabetes worldwide have
Pancreatitis (particularly chronic)
T2DM. This is characterized by insulin resistance with relative
Trauma/pancreatectomy
insulin defi ciency (i.e. patients secrete insulin, but not enough to
Neoplasia
overcome the insulin resistance) (see Chapters 10 and 11 ). Cystic fi brosis
Typically, they do not require insulin to survive but often will Hemachromatosis
eventually need insulin to maintain reasonable glycemia control, Others
often after many years.
Endocrinopathies
The precise molecular mechanisms underlying T2DM are not
Cushing syndrome
known. Major efforts have been made to discover underlying Acromegaly
genetic abnormalities but with only modest success (see Chapter Pheochromocytoma
12 ). The most promising to be date has been TCF7L2 [13] which Glucagonoma
may have a role in insulin secretion but this does not explain Somatostatinoma
diabetes susceptibility in the majority of subjects. What is clear is Others
that T2DM is closely associated with obesity and physical inactiv-
Drug - or chemical- induced
ity, and the westernization of lifestyles. The dramatic increase in Nicotinic acid
T2DM over the past two decades has been closely paralleled by Glucocorticoids
the rise in obesity worldwide. Both obesity, particularly visceral Thyroxine/triiodothyronine
adiposity, and physical inactivity cause insulin resistance which α - Adrenergic agonists
will result in diabetes in those with only a small capacity to Thiazides
increase insulin secretion. The incidence of T2DM also increases Pentamidine
Vacor
with age, which may be related to decrease in exercise and muscle
Others
mass; however, as the incidence increases so T2DM is being
found at younger ages and it is now not uncommon in adoles- Infections
cence in many ethnic groups. Congenital rubella
T2DM occurs in families so that those with a fi rst - degree rela- Cytomegalovirus
tive with diabetes have an almost 50% life - time risk. There is also Mumps
Others
marked variation between different ethnic groups. Thus, those of
Polynesian, Micronesian, South Asian, sub - Saharan African, Uncommon forms of immune- mediated disease
Arabian and Native American origin are much more prone to Insulin autoimmune syndrome
develop diabetes than Europids. Anti - insulin receptor antibodies
T2DM is a diagnosis by exclusion and the prevalence may fall “ Stiff man ” syndrome
Others
as causes are identifi ed, but this is likely to be a slow process.
Other genetic syndromes
Other sp ecifi c ty pes of d iabetes
(see Table 2.3 )
Diabetes occurs both as a result of specifi c genetic defects in
insulin secretion and action and in a range of other conditions
(Table 2.2 ).
26
--- Page 49 ---
Classifi cation and Diagnosis of Diabetes Mellitus Chapter 2
The best known of the defects in insulin secretion are the diagnostic criteria). There is signifi cant morbidity associated with
MODY family, which are a group of autosomal - dominant inher- GDM including intrauterine fetal death, congenital malforma-
ited disorders where there is hyperglycemia at an early age, gener- tions, neonatal hypoglycemia, jaundice, prematurity and macro-
ally of a mild nature. The most common concerns a mutation in somia. Risk factors for GDM include certain ethnic groups, those
the HNF - 1 α gene on chromosome 12 (MODY 3) while another with previous GDM or abnormalities of glucose tolerance, age,
is caused by mutations in the glucokinase gene on chromosome obesity and previous large babies.
7p. These account for a small number of people with diabetes but
are important in determining therapeutic approaches. Risk s tates
The association of diabetes with defects in insulin action has Prior to the 1979 and 1980 reports, the state of “ borderline ”
long been known, particularly in type A insulin resistance, lepre- diabetes had been recognized for cases where there was uncer-
chaunism and lipoatrophic diabetes. Not surprisingly, diseases of tainty about the diagnosis of diabetes but where plasma glucose
the exocrine pancreas often cause diabetes through destruction was above accepted normal levels. This was formalized by the
of the islets. Pancreatitis secondary to alcohol is probably the NDDG and WHO [3,4] as IGT, a higher than normal plasma
most common of these (see Chapter 18 ). Hemochromatosis and
cystic fi brosis also commonly result in diabetes.
Fibrocalculous pancreatitis is also included in this category. Table 2.3 Other genetic syndromes associated with diabetes. Adapted from
Originally, this was part of malnutrition - related diabetes mellitus World Health Organization [6] .
where there were two proposed variants: one associated with
cassava consumption in malnourished people but without Down syndrome
evidence of calculi, while the other was found after tropical Friedreich ataxia
pancreatitis and presented with fi brocalculous disease. The latter Huntington chorea
Klinefelter syndrome
is akin to the diabetes found with other forms of chronic pan-
Lawrence – Moon – Biedl syndrome
creatitis. In 1999 it was felt that this latter form would fi t into
Myotonic dystrophy
the category of “ other specifi c types ” and that more evidence
Porphyria
was needed before a specifi c malnutrition - related diabetes cate-
Prader – Willi syndrome
gory could be included.
Turner syndrome
Several endocrinopathies are associated with diabetes: Cushing Wolfram syndrome
syndrome, acromegaly, pheochromocytoma, glucagonoma and Others
hyperthyroidism (see Chapter 17 ). In general, the diabetes will
disappear if the endocrinopathy is treated. Many drugs and
chemicals cause diabetes (Table 2.2 , Chapter 16). Some of these
cause β - cell destruction but others will cause diabetes by increas-
Table 2.4 World Health Organization (WHO) recommended criteria for the
ing insulin resistance in susceptible individuals. diagnosis of diabetes and intermediate hyperglycemia.
Infections are also associated with the development of diabetes;
classically, mumps, congenital rubella, coxsackie B and cytome- Diabetes
galovirus are the main ones implicated. Many genetic syndromes Fasting plasma glucose ≥ 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
are also associated with diabetes (Table 2 .4) . and/or
There are other types of diabetes that do not fi t conveniently 2 - hour post - glucose load ≥ 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)
into any of the current classes. These include “ Flatbush ” diabetes plasma glucose
found in Afro - Americans [14] and so - called ketosis - prone T2DM Impaired glucose tolerance
found in Africans in sub - Saharan Africa [15] . These are both Fasting plasma glucose < 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL)
characterized by periods of ketosis with absolute insulin depend- and
ence and other times when the diabetes can be controlled by diet 2 - hour post - glucose load
alone. plasma glucose ≥ 7.8 and < 11.1 mmol/L (140 and 200 mg/dL)
Impaired fasting glycemia
Gestational d iabetes m ellitus Fasting plasma glucose 6.1 – 6.9 mmol/L (110 – 125 mg/dL)
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is hyperglycemia fi rst and (if measured)
detected during pregnancy (see Chapter 5 3) . This is distinct from 2 - hour post - glucose load < 7.8 mmol/L (140 mg/dL)
women with diabetes undergoing pregnancy, who have diabetes plasma glucose
in pregnancy rather than gestational diabetes. Plasma glucose
NB. All values refer to venous plasma glucose. Capillary plasma glucose
levels, both fasting and post - prandial, are lower than normal in
values would be the same fasting but 1 mmol/L (18 mg/dL) higher than
early pregnancy so that raised levels at this stage are almost cer-
venous levels after the glucose load. The glucose load is 75 g anhydrous
tainly caused by previously undetected T2DM. Screening for
glucose.
GDM is generally undertaken at around 28 weeks (see below for
27
--- Page 50 ---
Part 1 Diabetes in its Historical and Social Context
glucose 2 hours after a glucose load but below the diagnostic indicated the probability of diabetes. This was for whole blood so
cutoff for diabetes. Later, both the ADA and WHO introduced that in terms of plasma this would equate to about 150 mg/dL
the concept of IFG as a fasting plasma glucose above normal but (8.3 mmol/L); however, at that time, most blood glucose
below the diabetes diagnostic level [ 6,7]. Both IFG and IGT are chemical tests in use overestimated true glucose by at least
associated with a two - to threefold increased risk of developing 20 mg/dL (1.1 mmol/L). They placed most reliance on the OGTT.
diabetes, while IGT is also a cardiovascular risk marker. IFG was They examined both values at 1 and at 2 hours after the glucose
welcomed as it could indicate an at - risk individual without the load but decided that the 2 - hour value on its own was adequate
need to perform a glucose tolerance test. Collectively, IFG and – and this was the key diagnostic test suggested. The value
IGT became known as “ pre - diabetes ” – a misleading term as not selected was 130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L) for venous whole blood
everyone with pre - diabetes develops diabetes, and it diminishes and that was to be applied regardless of whether the 50 - g or the
the importance of other risk markers such as family history. The 100 - g glucose load was given. They also introduced the important
term “ intermediate hyperglycemia ” is preferred by WHO [16] . concept of “ borderline ” diabetes – the forerunner of IGT – where
IGT and IFG are more likely in older people, those who are obese, values were to be above normal but less than those diagnostic for
people from particular high risk ethnic groups and those with diabetes: 110 mg/dL (6.1 mmol/L) to 129 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L) for
cardiovascular disease or other features of the metabolic syn- venous whole blood 2 hours after the glucose load.
drome, such as dyslipidemia, hypertension or visceral adiposity. O ne further important comment is the need for people to be
prepared for the OGTT with at least 250 g carbohydrate con-
sumed for 3 days before the test. This still applies and is rarely
Diagnostic c riteria adhered to, which may explain the large number of older people
with normal fasting glucose but elevated 2 - hour values. Many of
The diagnosis of diabetes mellitus has lifelong implications for these could well have “ starvation ” diabetes rather than genuine
the individual. Thus, both the clinician, and person tested, must diabetes.
have full confi dence in the diagnosis. In the symptomatic indi-
vidual this is easier but in asymptomatic people once an abnor- The m odern e ra
mal test has been found it must be confi rmed by a further test. The big change and rationalization came in 1979 and 1980 with
This is increasingly important as screening programs spread and the work of NDDG and WHO [3,4] . They reviewed all available
also because 30 – 50% of people with T2DM are asymptomatic data and concluded that a 75 - g load would be appropriate and
and unaware that they have the disorder. that this should be consumed in 300 mL water over 5 minutes.
They based the diagnostic levels for fasting and 2 - hour values
Clinical d iagnosis of d iabetes in largely on bimodality observations in high prevalence groups
s ymptomatic i ndividuals such as the Pima Indians and on some observations of risk for
The search for diabetes in an individual is often driven by the retinopathy. Fasting and 2 - hour venous plasma levels of 140 mg/
presence of characteristic symptoms such as thirst, polyuria, dL (7.8 mmol/L) and 200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) were recom-
weight loss, recurrent infections and, in more severe cases, pre - mended by NDDG and these were – somewhat unfortunately –
coma. In such individuals, a single elevated casual plasma glucose rounded up to 8 mmol/L and 11 mmol/L by the WHO Committee.
value is suffi cient to confi rm the diagnosis. A defi nite diagnosis IGT was defi ned as a fasting venous plasma value < 8 mmol/L with
can be assumed if the venous plasma glucose level is greater than a 2 - hour value of 8 – 11 mmol/L. Confusion was rife and a further
11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) or 12.2 mmol/L (220 mg/dL) in capil- evaluation took place in 1985 [5] when the WHO group adjusted
lary plasma [5] . WHO describes values of 5.0 – 11.0 mmol/L as their values to match the NDDG values precisely.
uncertain. Further testing is then required as described below. The next big change occurred in 1997 and 1999 with the pub-
lication of the ADA and the new WHO report. This time a con-
Diagnostic t e sts for d iabetes siderable amount of data were available to look at risk of
A raised blood glucose has been the hallmark of diabetes mellitus retinopathy at different glucose levels. The data were cross -
for over 100 years. The oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was sectional but reasonable agreement was shown between studies
developed in the early years of the 19th century but only came of Egyptians, US citizens from NHANES III and Pima Indians
into common use as methods for measuring blood glucose (for review see Expert Committee on the Diagnosis and
became easier. When the fi rst WHO Expert Committee on Classifi cation of Diabetes Mellitus [7] ). Although there was some
Diabetes reviewed diagnostic tests [2] they fi rst of all stated that tolerance on the precise values, the existing 2 - hour cut point of
glycosuria was an unsatisfactory test and that neither the presence 11.1 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) seemed reasonable but the fasting
of glycosuria nor its absence could rule in or rule out diabetes. value was lowered to 7.0 mmol/L (126 mg/dL; Table 2.4 ). At the
They also commented on the wide range of glucose tolerance tests same time, the concept of IFG was introduced. This was equiva-
available at the time and recommended strongly that only the lent to IGT but for the fasting state and was meant to indicate a
50 - g or the 100 - g OGTT should be used. They suggested that a risk state for diabetes. The values chosen were 6.1 – 6.9 mmol/L
fasting venous blood glucose level over 130 mg/dL (7.2 mmol/L) (110 – 125 mg/dL).
28